Strategic Debate in Gorsuch Battle: Use Filibuster Now or Later? - The New York Times
WASHINGTON — The conventional political narrative as Judge Neil M. Gorsuch’s Supreme Court nomination nears its endgame is that liberals want at least 40 Senate Democrats to follow through on their threat to stall him with a filibuster, daring Republicans to carry out their vow to change the chamber’s rules and confirm him anyway. Conservatives, meanwhile, are outraged — outraged! — that Democrats might precipitate such a crisis.
But some observers on both sides of the ideological divide say that the long-term strategic interests of each faction are the opposite of what their leaders are indicating in public. If so, the surface appearance of the partisan fight unfolding this week is really a tricky inversion of what is actually in play.
The conventional show was on display in dueling statements on Monday, reacting to the Senate Judiciary Committee’s vote to send Judge Gorsuch’s nomination to the floor for final consideration. The executive director of the liberal group MoveOn.org declared that “Democrats are absolutely right” to vow a filibuster, a parliamentary tactic to block a vote. The executive vice president of the conservative Federalist Society, meanwhile, denounced Democrats for threatening to “break over 200 years of Senate tradition.”
To the contrary thinkers in both factions, however, it is politically inevitable that Judge Gorsuch will be confirmed. The real question is which tactics will best set up the next fight. They are thinking about what will happen if a moderate or liberal justice — like Ruth Bader Ginsburg, 84; Anthony M. Kennedy, 80; or Stephen G. Breyer, 78 — retires or dies while President Trump is still in office and Republicans retain a narrow Senate majority.
The first possibility is that the showdown over abolishing the filibuster rule takes place now. If so, its framing will be Democrats’ general anger at Mr. Trump as well as their specific outrage over what they consider the theft of a Supreme Court seat by Republicans’ refusal to give a hearing last year to President Barack Obama’s nominee, Judge Merrick B. Garland, to fill the vacancy created by Justice Antonin Scalia’s death in February 2016.
The substantive stakes now are relatively low: Judge Gorsuch appears to be very conservative, but so was Justice Scalia. Confirming Judge Gorsuch would merely preserve the ideological status quo on the closely divided Supreme Court. Should the confirmation move ahead, all 52 Republican senators will probably stick together, bolstered by a few Democrats from conservative-leaning states. Those are enough votes to easily clear the way for confirming Judge Gorsuch — and all future nominees — by a simple majority.
But the dynamics could play out differently in a second situation: Judge Gorsuch is confirmed, but the filibuster rule survives. If Mr. Trump then gets to nominate a successor to a moderate or liberal justice, the substantive stakes would be much higher.
The framing for the filibuster fight would be different at that point. It would focus on whether the nominee would provide a fifth vote to overrule the Roe v. Wade abortion rights precedent and create a new conservative majority on other highly charged topics, like guns, affirmative action and the rights of same-sex couples.
Under that second possibility, it may not be inevitable that the filibuster rule falls. Red-state Democrats would be less likely to break ranks, and institutionalist or moderate Republican senators, like Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, might be more reluctant to vote to change the chamber’s longstanding rules.
Indeed, it would be politically riskier for Mr. Trump at that point to nominate an outspoken conservative. And it might motivate him to select a more moderate nominee than if the filibuster had already been abolished, just as 2016’s political reality led Mr. Obama to pick a nominee who was older and more moderate than liberal activists preferred.
That possibility has prompted Ed Whelan, a prominent conservative legal commentator and the president of the Ethics and Public Policy Center, to argue that it is in the long-term interests of conservatives if Republicans can abolish the filibuster as part of confirming Judge Gorsuch.
“Filibuster of Gorsuch would be best possible set-up for abolition of #SCOTUS filibuster. Need strong nominees for next vacancies,” Mr. Whelan wrote on Twitter. He added: “Not saying filibuster abolition will be easy. But it will be much harder with next vacancy. Best to have fight now. Pave way to transform” the Supreme Court.
A few other voices publicly agree. Richard L. Hasen, a liberal law professor at the University of California, Irvine, has argued that Democrats should hold their fire for the next vacancy, when they will have more leverage.
And John O. McGinnis, a conservative legal scholar at Northwestern University has argued that the Democrats’ threatened filibuster this week “seems irrational” if its purpose is “to help create a Supreme Court more friendly to Democratic commitments.” Eliminating the filibuster rule, he said, would leave them “in a worse position for the rest of President Trump’s term.”
But there are complications. There might not be another Supreme Court vacancy before Democrats retake the White House and the Senate. And some liberals think a Democratic revival is more likely if Democrats stoke liberal voters’ anger and energy by putting up uncompromising resistance to Mr. Trump’s agenda.
Nan Aron, the president of the liberal Alliance for Justice, supports filibustering Judge Gorsuch. She argued that if Mr. Trump does get another Supreme Court vacancy to fill, Republicans would probably still be able to abolish the filibuster at that point. If so, she maintained, acquiescing to Judge Gorsuch now might gain liberals nothing while it would risk deflating the enthusiasm of their movement.
“It’s really the first time in so many years that individuals across the country, the base of the party, has gotten energized around the Supreme Court,” she said. “I think the base would be very unforgiving to Democrats who prevented a filibuster from taking place. The base is very fired up.”
And with the minority leader, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, publicly calling on colleagues to filibuster Judge Gorsuch, any Democratic senators who break ranks do so at personal political risk. Against that backdrop, the Senate Majority Leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, said on Tuesday that he would file a “cloture” motion to proceed to an up-or-down vote on Judge Gorsuch, even as it appeared that Democrats had enough support to block such a vote. That would set up the showdown over the filibuster rule that conservatives like Mr. Whelan crave and liberals like Mr. Hasen fear would be a mistake.
“It’s still a long shot, but you only get one chance to make a lot of noise about the demise of the filibuster and to try to preserve a mechanism that gives the minority some degree of veto power,” Mr. Hasen said. “It seems like it would be worth holding it for when it would likely matter much, much more. But Democrats seem to feel like they need to please their base and go on a suicide mission now.”