Was Mary Todd Lincoln Driven ‘Mad’ by a Vitamin Deficiency? - The New York Times
Could pernicious anemia, a disease caused by a vitamin B12 deficiency, have explained the many strange behaviors of Mary Todd Lincoln?
She was not exactly a model first lady. Historians have had a field day describing her violent temper, wild shopping sprees (she owned 300 pairs of kid gloves), depressed moods and all-consuming fears of burglars, storms and poverty. Late in life, at her son’s urging, she was committed to a mental hospital for several months.
Plenty of theories, none proven, have been floated. She was bipolar. She had syphilis or that well known cause of feminine madness, menstrual trouble. She was spoiled and narcissistic. She never recovered from a road accident in which her head hit a rock. She lost her mind grieving the deaths of three of her four sons and her husband’s assassination.
The latest addition to the list of possible diagnoses comes from Dr. John G. Sotos, a cardiologist, technology executive at Intel and one of the medical consultants who helped dream up the mystery diseases that afflicted patients on the television show “House.”
Dr. Sotos has long been interested in difficult diagnoses, and has written a self-published book suggesting that Abraham Lincoln had a genetic syndrome that caused cancers of the thyroid and adrenal glands.
In an interview, Dr. Sotos said that while he was studying President Lincoln, he came across something that intrigued him about Mrs. Lincoln: an 1852 letter mentioning that she had a sore mouth. He knew that vitamin B deficiencies could cause a sore tongue, and he began looking into her health.
Pernicious anemia could explain many of her problems, both mental and physical, he reported in an article published this week in Perspectives in Biology and Medicine.
The disease develops gradually in people who cannot absorb enough vitamin B12, which the body needs to make DNA. Deficiencies impair the ability to make red blood cells and can affect every organ, including the brain and nervous system.
Severe cases are not often seen now because blood tests can diagnose the disease early and doctors can treat it. But that was not so in Mrs. Lincoln’s day.
“With any complex disease that affects so many organs, you get a long list of symptoms,” Dr. Sotos said. “Mary had just about all of them.”
Among her symptoms: pallor, weakness, fatigue, fevers, headaches, rapid heartbeat, swelling and puffiness in her hands and face, periods of unexplained weight loss and eye trouble. Her mental symptoms also fit the bill — irritability, delusions and hallucinations, but with a clear mind much of the time.
Photographs of Mrs. Lincoln are portraits of the disease, Dr. Sotos said. He writes, “she was stocky, with a wide face, wide jaw, and widely separated blue eyes,” adding that those characteristics are common in people with the disease, though no one knows why.
In addition, he said, her parents were cousins, with ancestors from a part of Scotland where pernicious anemia was found in the 1960s to be unusually common.
Dr. Sotos said he hoped the diagnosis would lead historians to look more kindly on Mrs. Lincoln as “simply a woman with a biochemically injured mind.”
He said his findings had changed his own attitude. At first, when he read accounts of her hitting her husband and insulting him in front of guests, Dr. Sotos said, “I really didn’t like her very much. I feel bad about that now.”
Dr. Christopher Crenner, a physician and medical historian, called Dr. Sotos’ work “ingenious, meticulously researched and argued,” and said the diagnosis was medically plausible.
But he went on to say in an email, “it still amounts to little more than a parlor game for smart physicians. Diagnosing famous figures from the past is entertaining, but it rarely adds much to understanding history.”
Dr. Crenner, who is chairman of the department of history and philosophy of medicine at the University of Kansas Medical Center, and president of the American Society for the History of Medicine, said it was already widely recognized that Mrs. Lincoln was mentally ill, though the exact nature of her illness was not known.
History should regard her with sympathy regardless of the cause, he said. A physical illness that can affect the mind — like B12 deficiency — is not more deserving of compassion than one that is strictly mental.
“Perhaps we might better engage in fighting the stigmas of mental illness directly,” Dr. Crenner said, “regardless of whether it might have been confused with what we now call pernicious anemia.”