Flu Activity and Norovirus on the Rise in Europe - The New York Times
Americans are not the only ones under siege by influenza. The flu is now widespread in at least 10 European countries, and a growing number are reporting an increase in cases.
At least 16 European countries are reporting increasing flu activity, with much of it in the northwestern part of the Continent, according to the latest weekly surveillance report from the European Center for Disease Prevention and Control in Stockholm.
Norway appears to be hardest hit. So far it is the only nation on the Continent reporting “high intensity” flu transmission. As of this week, about a dozen other countries, including France, Germany and Ireland, were experiencing more moderate levels, up from four in the last week of 2012, the center said.
As in the United States, the flu arrived early in Europe. But experts there say that although activity is increasing, they do not expect the flu season overall to be much worse than normal.
So far, 239 hospitalized cases were confirmed through laboratory tests as influenza, a number that is expected to grow. It is presumably lower than the actual number of cases, since many who contract the flu do not end up in hospitals. The report also noted that two confirmed cases so far were fatal.
In the United States, the flu epidemic has spread to at least 47 states and killed 20 children. But the blend of strains circulating here is slightly different than in Europe. In the United States, the predominant strain this season is Type A. In Europe, the predominant strain is Type B, which has two subtypes. According to the new report, this season’s vaccine is better suited to the viruses circulating in Europe.
“The virological match with the strains in the current seasonal influenza vaccine is considered good,” the authors wrote.
But at the same time, parts of Europe are being gripped by norovirus, the severe gastrointestinal illness that also has spread across the United States and Canada.
In Britain, the Health Protection Agency said that more than 3,800 cases have been confirmed through testing so far, an increase of about 70 percent over this time last year. Since many people choose to avoid the hospital and suffer through the retching, acute diarrhea and other symptoms of the sickness at home, the true number of cases is likely far greater than the number reported, experts said.
The norovirus epidemic has spread across the English Channel to France as well. About 474,000 people there have visited doctors complaining of severe diarrhea, the news agency UPI reported. French officials said the number of cases had surpassed the 283 per 100,000 mark that characterizes an epidemic.