Making Your Family Better at Personal Finance - The New York Times
When I become emperor, three things will happen immediately:
• Blue-eyed soul music will be banned from the radio.
• DVRs will automatically add an extra hour so they never cut off a sporting event before it’s over.
• Everyone will be required to pass a basic personal finance course.
I am serious about the last one.
We really need to improve our nation’s financial literacy. When asked five basic personal finance questions in 2015, only 37 percent of the people surveyed, as part of the Finra Investor Education Foundation’s Financial Literacy Quiz, got at least four of them right.
That number has steadily declined since Finra — the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority, which helps set policies for brokers and Wall Street — first offered the quiz in 2009. (For the most recent quiz, Finra surveyed a representative sample of more than 27,000 Americans nationwide from June through October 2015. The margin of error was estimated at 0.5 percent.)
And we are not talking advanced calculus here. A representative question? “Suppose you have $100 in a saving account earning 2 percent interest a year. After five years, how much would you have? More than $102? Exactly $102? Less than $102?” To get it right, you don’t have to know how much money you would have, just that it would be more than $102.
Also, on a personal level, I know personal finance education works. Of my four children, only our daughter took a personal finance course. She did it in college to satisfy her math requirement, and she is far better with money than her equally smart brothers.
Given how strongly I feel about this, I am delighted by the new finance book “Make Your Kid a Money Genius (Even if You’re Not)” by Beth Kobliner (Simon & Schuster, $19.95). It’s not ideal, but it’s a step in the right direction. Ms. Kobliner, a former staff writer for Money who wrote “Get a Financial Life,” aimed at millennials, has produced another engaging book.
It helps that she shares personal stories, like this: “When my son was in preschool and we had a playdate with twins who lived nearby, I was impressed that they knew the difference between a penny, a nickel, a dime and a quarter. And I felt sort of embarrassed — me, the money writer — that I hadn’t taught my little guy.”
Her tone is supportive throughout. “You don’t have to be a perfect investor to be a good investor,” she writes. And: “Understand your own financial baggage and leave it behind.”
The book’s organizing principle is just fine. Ms. Kobliner selects a topic (what to tell your children about debt, for example) and suggests age-appropriate advice.
When they are in preschool, she says, help them understand that credit cards are not a magic wand. “Buying stuff costs money whether you use cash” or charge it, she writes.
By the time they are in middle or high school, it’s time to go much deeper: Explain the high interest rates that credit cards charge and why it is imperative to pay off your balance each month.
But I have two reservations.
First, the book seems padded. I am not sure it needed separate chapters on insurance, the need to work hard and “giving back.” Together, the three take up more than 20 percent of the book.
Second, some of the advice seems off base or vague.
For example, in talking about the importance of delayed gratification, Ms. Kobliner writes, “Teaching your kid to focus on the long-term payoff doesn’t take nearly as much effort as it sounds.” To which I can only respond, “Have you ever taken a 5-year-old down a supermarket’s cereal aisle?”
Advice like, “Invest a little — but not too much — in bonds” is not specific enough. How much is too much?
Ms. Kobliner gives lots of good prescriptions: Diversify; don’t trust stock tips; use index funds. But while rules of thumb are helpful, my children always learned better when the examples were vivid and they knew the “why” behind the answer.
Like when discussing why you want to invest in mutual funds with low fees, she writes: “Say you put $1,000 into a fund with an expense ratio of 1.5 percent, and at the same time you put another into a fund charging just 0.2 percent. If they both earn 7 percent a year, after 30 years, the first fund would have accumulated $4,984, and the second would have $7,197.”
That’s fine. But the numbers are rather small and the conclusion is not memorable. So instead, I wish she had written something like this: “As you may expect, fees and expenses vary from fund to fund. A fund with high costs must perform better than a low-cost fund to generate the same returns for you. Even small differences in fees can translate into large differences in returns over time. For example, if you invested $10,000 in a fund that produced a 10 percent annual return before expenses and had annual operating expenses of 1.5 percent, then after 20 years you would have roughly $49,725. But if the fund had expenses of only 0.5 percent, then you would end up with $60,858.”
The author of that paragraph? The Securities and Exchange Commission. You can find it on the agency’s website, without having to buy a book.
Yet Ms. Kobliner’s new book is worth reading. It’s a good base for building financial literacy. Simply helping children learn personal finance basics will benefit them in the long term. Living within their means and saving for retirement as early as possible will give them a running start.
And if the book makes you stop periodically to reconsider your own spending and saving habits, or helps you find a good answer when your child asks about money, that’s good, too. Ms. Kobliner’s book won’t make anyone a financial genius. But it may lay a solid foundation.