Nordstrom Suspends Effort to Go Private Until After the Holidays - The New York Times
The family behind the 116-year-old Nordstrom retail chain is shelving its efforts to go private until after the holiday season, the company said Monday.
The high-end Seattle-based brand, which has 360 stores across North America, is facing the same economic pressures and competition from e-commerce as other brick-and-mortar retailers. Although family members have been tight-lipped about their reasons for wanting to take the company private, such a move would allow Nordstrom more freedom to experiment with solutions while avoiding the scrutiny of public ownership and the pressure of quarterly earnings reports.
But in a regulatory filing on Monday, the company cited “the difficulty of obtaining debt financing in the current retail environment” in the family’s decision to suspend its plans.
Nordstrom’s stock sank 5.3 percent Monday to $40.40, down $2.25 a share. The share price is down 22.2 percent from a year ago.
The winter shopping season is always volatile — sales during the quarter can make or break a retailer — but this year’s performance figures could be especially difficult to forecast given the effect of recent hurricanes, unseasonably warm weather and fast-paced online growth.
And potential buyers are more skeptical given that mall-based retailers are in “a space that right now is very broadly out of favor,” said Dylan Carden, an analyst at William Blair.
“Banging up against the holiday period, lender appetite starts to wane and we’re starting to see some pretty significant interest rates,” he said. “It’s hard to get over the goal line.”
Nordstrom first said in June that the family group — which owns 31.3 percent of the company — was exploring the possibility of taking it private.
The company’s board formed a special committee of directors to review potential proposals from the family group, which includes Blake W. Nordstrom, Peter E. Nordstrom and Erik B. Nordstrom, who are co-presidents of the company. Other members are James F. Nordstrom, who is the company’s president of stores; Bruce A. Nordstrom, chairman emeritus; and Anne E. Gittinger, a granddaughter of the company’s co-founder.
Traditional department store chains, burdened by expensive real estate at malls, are struggling to stay abreast of online retailers like Amazon. Macy’s plans to close 100 stores, while investors are losing patience with companies like J. C. Penney and Dillard’s, whose recent earnings reports have missed expectations.
And several major mall-based brands including Gymboree, Rue 21 and Payless ShoeSource declared bankruptcy this year, while Wet Seal was sold. Lenders are skittish as a result.
“The financing market has been difficult given recent bankruptcies,” analysts for KeyBanc Capital Markets wrote in a note to clients on Monday.
Nordstrom is relatively strong compared with many of its retail rivals, with a reputation for consistent customer service and steady online sales growth.
Same-store sales for Nordstrom increased 1.7 percent year-over-year in its second quarter, which ended July 29. Over the same period, Nordstrom increased its overall store count by 25 locations. Nordstrom has been buying up retail leases from Sears Canada, which said earlier this month that it would shut down operations and leave 12,000 employees jobless.
The company has been experimenting with new store formats, such as the Nordstrom Local concept it opened in Southern California in early October. The 3,000-square-foot store is much smaller than the average 140,000-square-foot Nordstrom unit and operates as more of a showroom than a sales floor.
In August, Nordstrom expanded a service that allows customers to reserve items online and try them on in person to nearly 40 stores from the six stores that piloted the concept last year.
The company has spent a substantial amount on store improvements, expansion and technology upgrades, but the investments have been “wise,” according to Bridget Weishaar, an analyst with Morningstar.
In a note to clients on Monday, Ms. Weishaar reiterated an earlier prediction that Nordstrom would add more stores and increase its revenue. The chain, she wrote, is “one of the best operators in the department-store space,” citing its product offering, store count and store locations that “match its niche consumer base.”