United Technologies’ Deal for Rockwell Collins Faces Skepticism - The New York Times
Buying Rockwell Collins for $23 billion — one of the biggest deals in the history of the aerospace industry, uniting two major manufacturers — was meant to be a crowning achievement for United Technologies.
Instead, investors and customers appeared to be deeply skeptical of the blockbuster takeover.
Never mind that the combined company would have more than $60 billion in sales. Or that its stable of products would include nearly every piece of a plane, from Pratt & Whitney jet engines to cockpit parts, seats and even in-flight entertainment units.
Shares in United Technologies dropped nearly 6 percent on Tuesday after the deal was announced. The plunge contributed to a drop in the Dow Jones industrial average, of which United Technologies is a component.
And both Boeing and Airbus, two of the companies’ main customers, expressed doubt about the benefits of the union. “We are skeptical that it would be in the best interest of — or add value to — our customers and industry,” Boeing said in a statement.
That has left United Technologies to defend a merger that company executives argue creates the largest supplier of aerospace components in the world, capable of delivering both lower-cost parts and innovations.
Skeptics appeared to believe that the deal, which may be a prelude to a breakup of the industrial conglomerate years down the road, was an expensive proposition with few clear benefits. Shareholders of United Technologies are instead being asked to accept a halt to share buybacks for the next three to four years, while the company may take a hit to its credit rating.
The agreement comes on the heels of a big deal by Rockwell Collins itself: the $8.3 billion takeover of B/E Aerospace, a manufacturer of seats and other interior plane parts.
Much of the early speculation about the deal, including from analysts, was that United Technologies planned to spin off its commercial unit, which includes Otis elevators and Carrier air-conditioners.
That invited comparisons to other mergers that functioned in large part as a reshuffling of corporate assets. Dow Chemical and DuPont recently closed their $130 billion merger, a transaction explicitly designed to lead to a breakup of the chemical giant into three smaller businesses.
And when Pfizer announced an agreement to buy a fellow drug maker, Allergan, in late 2015, it said that it, too, would consider some sort of corporate split several years afterward. (Pfizer later called off the proposed transaction.)
But United Technologies’ chief executive, Gregory J. Hayes, stressed on Tuesday that talk of a corporate breakup was premature. In fact, he said, United Technologies will need the revenue from all of the combined operations’ businesses to pay down the debt that the transaction will incur.
But if United Technologies’ stock price lags several years down the line, a potential breakup would be on the table.
“I’ve committed to looking at every strategic option out there,” Mr. Hayes said in a telephone interview.
In the meantime, he said, putting United Technologies and Rockwell Collins together will yield some $500 million in cost savings. And it will provide customers with a one-stop shop for airplane components that is more efficient and capable of technological advancement.
In particular, Mr. Hayes and Kelly Ortberg, Rockwell’s chief executive, spoke about how planes are becoming more digital. Uniting the companies, they argued, will lead to better ways of making the products that future planes will need.
Analysts said combining the two companies made enormous sense on a basic level. One, Nigel Coe of Morgan Stanley, described the deal on a conference call with analysts as “the logical deal of the decade.”
Mr. Hayes, on a call with analysts, joked that his eye had been on Rockwell Collins for more than 30 years, since he was an executive at Sundstrand Aerospace, which merged with United Technologies in 1999.
He spoke more sincerely about the long and storied history of the two companies. Goodrich, which United Technologies bought five years ago, made the spacesuits worn on the Mercury space missions. And Collins made the radios that Neil Armstrong used to tell Earth about his first steps on the moon.
The deal is unlikely to run into antitrust issues, because the two companies have little overlap in their product portfolios. United Technologies said it anticipated closing the transaction next fall.
But many analysts added that the price seemed rich. United Technologies agreed to pay $140 a share in cash and stock. That was 18 percent above where Rockwell’s stock was traded on Aug. 3, a day before news reports said United Technologies was considering a bid.
When the assumption of Rockwell’s debt is included, the enterprise value for the deal is about $30 billion.
Barbara Noverini, an analyst at Morningstar, calculated in a research note that the purchase price amounted to 14 times Rockwell’s earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda. Other big aerospace deals were valued at roughly 13 times Ebitda.
Two of the companies’ major customers did not exactly welcome the deal with open arms. Boeing, in its statement, warned that it would turn to regulators for help if the combination threatened competition in parts manufacturing.
And Airbus, whose new lineup of jets has experienced delays because of problems with the latest batch of Pratt & Whitney jet engines, said it hoped the deal "would not distract UTC from their top operational priority.”
Both Boeing and Airbus have increasingly stepped into the business of servicing airplane parts in the aftermarket, traditionally the province of component makers like United and Rockwell.
Mr. Hayes said in the telephone interview that he would spend this week pitching his customers on the benefits of the deal.
Some analysts also said that collecting even the estimated $500 million in cost savings might be difficult, given the small overlap in the two businesses and the fact that Rockwell Collins is already regarded as efficiently run.
At the end of the day, however, Mr. Hayes defended the transaction as simply being a good deal.
“It’s just a great combination on so many levels that I don’t think anyone will say that we overpaid at the end of the day,” he told analysts.