B Capital Hires Howard L. Morgan as Its New Chairman - The New York Times
LONDON — During his long career, Howard L. Morgan has been an early executive at Renaissance Technologies, the giant hedge fund, and a co-founder of First Round Capital, the venture capital firm.
His next role: joining the venture capital fund co-led by Eduardo Saverin, one of the co-founders of Facebook.
Mr. Saverin’s venture capital firm, B Capital Group, announced on Monday that it had hired Mr. Morgan as its chairman.
It also announced other personnel moves, including the naming of Joe Davis, the chairman of the Boston Consulting Group’s North American operations, as vice chairman; the hiring of Allen Duan as an operating partner; and the hiring of Rohit Bhagat as a senior adviser.
The addition of Mr. Morgan and the other executives is meant to bolster B Capital, which looks to invest in start-ups around the world. The firm was created two years ago by Mr. Saverin, who is now based in Singapore, and Raj Ganguly, who is based on the West Coast. It also has a strategic partnership with the Boston Consulting Group, which can both help find potential investments and recommend the firm to start-ups in search of capital.
“Howard, at the end of the day, is a giant in the industry,” Mr. Saverin said in a telephone interview. “You can gain a tremendous amount of perspective just from speaking with him for a couple of minutes.”
Mr. Morgan, 71, turned from academia to investing in the early 1980s, when he headed venture investments for the then-nascent Renaissance Technologies hedge fund for nearly a decade. He later helped found Idealab, a foundry for start-ups.
In 2004, he co-founded First Round Capital, the seed-stage investment firm that was an early investor in Uber, with Josh Kopelman and other partners. And he has served as a guide to other young investors, including those at B Capital.
“The reason we’re so excited to have Howard on the team is that he’s been an adviser and mentor to us since our inception,” Mr. Ganguly said.
Mr. Morgan began stepping back from his duties at First Round Capital about five years ago. But Mr. Saverin and Mr. Ganguly told him earlier this year that they wanted to bring him on board to help build and develop B Capital.
“What Eduardo and Raj wanted from me was help and experience really building a culture,” Mr. Morgan said. “How do you make a physically distributed organization really feel like one company?”
Mr. Morgan then conducted more due diligence on the firm, including by spending time with Rich Lesser, the chief executive of the Boston Consulting Group.
Ultimately, Mr. Morgan said, the opportunity to help another budding venture firm grow proved too attractive to pass up.
One primary focus for B Capital will remain finding investments outside of Silicon Valley and China, including in Southeast Asia.
“Asia is simply a massive market with opportunities that abound,” Mr. Saverin said, pointing to the region’s embrace of mobile technologies. “It’s just an incredibly exciting economy to invest in.”