A Bonus Is Declined; a Problem Remains - The New York Times
When IBM reported fourth-quarter and full-year earnings a few weeks ago, they could have been an excuse for popping champagne corks in the executive suite. 
That’s because annual bonuses for the company’s chief executive, Virginia Rometty, and her top executives are based on a formula that heavily weights earnings growth, and IBM’s earnings were a record $5.73 a share, up 12 percent. Ms. Rometty stood to collect up to twice her target bonus, or $8 million, on top of her $1.5 million salary and other compensation. 
“She could have draped herself in the short-term metric of earnings per share and said, ‘Let’s celebrate,’ ” said Jeffrey Sonnenfeld, a professor at the Yale School of Management and founder of the Chief Executive Leadership Institute. 
Instead, Ms. Rometty announced, “In view of the company’s overall full-year results, my senior team and I have recommended that we forgo our personal annual incentive payments for 2013.”  
Soon after, Barclays’ chief executive, Antony Jenkins, turned down his bonus, too, for the second year in a row. “I have concluded that it would not be right, in the circumstances, for me to accept a bonus for 2013, and I have, therefore, respectfully declined the one offered to me by the board.” Mr. Jenkins could have earned up to 1.7 million pounds, or $2.8 million, on top of his annual salary of £1.1 million pounds.
Last year, Royal Bank of Scotland’s chief executive, Stephen Hester, turned down his £1 million bonus. Even Larry Ellison, the highly paid chief executive of Oracle, last year declined a $1.2 million annual performance bonus and took only a token $1 salary, although those are only a drop in the bucket of his $77 million stock-based compensation.
Bonuses are only one part of a chief executive’s pay package, and a relatively small one in many cases. And these few examples notwithstanding, executive compensation is still going through the roof. Google announced this month that it paid its chairman, Eric Schmidt, $100 million in stock options and another $6 million in cash even though he was replaced as chief executive. American bank executives have not followed the lead of their British counterparts, and have been reaping big pay increases this year despite many of the same scandals and penalties afflicting the British banks. The gap between the pay of chief executives and average workers has never been wider.
“More C.E.O.s should consider this, absolutely,” said Professor Sonnenfeld, who discussed the bonus issue with Ms. Rometty before she turned it down. “They surely don’t need the cash to live on. A few companies in distress have done it, but that’s not the case at IBM. It’s a great marriage of substance and symbolism, and I find it very refreshing.”
While still unusual, turning down pay may become “something of a trend,” said David Eaton, vice president for proxy research at the shareholder advisory firm Glass Lewis, because of increasing public awareness of executive compensation. “It’s a little bit of public penance for poor performance. But what it really comes down to is increased scrutiny by large investors on executive compensation issues. Paying out or accepting bonuses in times of underperformance that hit the shareholders just doesn’t appear right.”
That’s certainly the case at IBM and Barclays. IBM may have just reported record earnings, but over the last year, IBM shares have dropped over 8 percent, and are more than 14 percent below the level reached last March. Barclays shares have dropped nearly 4 percent in the last year and are still far below levels reached before the financial crisis. By comparison, over the last year, the Standard & Poor’s 500-stock index has gained 21 percent.
At IBM, Ms. Rometty did not say exactly what she meant by IBM’s “overall full-year results,” but they surely included revenue, which was down 5 percent, and pretax operating income, which dropped 8 percent. Revenue at IBM’s systems and technology unit declined a steep 26 percent and the unit lost $500 million. 
Of course, the fact that the chief executives at IBM and Barclays turned down large bonuses — not to mention all the chief executives at underperforming companies who took them — raises the question of why they were getting bonuses in the first place. As Allan McCall, a founder of the consulting firm Compensia and a researcher on executive compensation at Stanford Business School, put it, “If a company had a bad year, then what are the metrics that would lead a company to pay a bonus?” 
According to IBM’s most recent proxy statement, annual incentive bonuses for the chief executive and other members of top management are calculated based on a formula that looks at revenue growth, operating net income, operating earnings per share and free cash flow. Of those factors, operating net income accounts for 60 percent of the weighting in the formula. The stock price is not a factor, even though it is usually what shareholders care most about.
IBM does not disclose specific targets, citing competitive reasons. But the bar may not be all that high. According to the company’s proxy statements, IBM’s chief executives received the full target bonus every year since the target bonuses were disclosed beginning in 2005, except for 2009. 
Given IBM’s performance last year, Ms. Rometty presumably met or exceeded this year’s targets for earnings and free cash flow. While revenue may have fallen short, that accounts for only 20 percent of the formula. While the compensation committee might have considered some discretionary factors, if Ms. Rometty exceeded the earnings and cash flow targets, she would have been in line for 80 percent of her maximum bonus, or $6.4 million, even in what was a disappointing year. 
“That suggests something is out of whack,” Mr. McCall said.
(An IBM spokesman declined to disclose the size of the bonus Ms. Rometty turned down and otherwise declined to comment beyond the company’s news release.)
Mr. Eaton of Glass Lewis said: “We’ve brought this issue up as a criticism of IBM. We think with regards to the short-term incentive plan, those goals could be disclosed retrospectively. Shareholders are left in the dark when those targets aren’t disclosed. Some other companies are much more transparent. It’s very commonplace to disclose the short-term target and what the actual performance was.”
Still, there is little doubt that Ms. Rometty chose to leave a good deal of money on the table — a fortune to most people. Professor Sonnenfeld praised the message it sent to shareholders as IBM is making large capital investments in its new Watson development platform in the cloud. “She’s trying to lead by example,” he said. “She believes actions speak louder than words.”
He continued: "It’s a great struggle to turn the IBM battleship. It doesn’t happen overnight. It’s great she’s done this and is willing to make big bets on the future. She believes it’s going to pay off and she’s putting her compensation behind it.”
Mr. Eaton added: “I think IBM made a good move. It’s not necessarily something that we’d push for, but if the company thinks it’s the right thing, after talking with the investor base, it can be an appropriate step.” 
Ms. Rometty’s decision also sends an important message to employees, Mr. McCall said. “It’s another way to communicate to the organization that things aren’t going great, we need to do better, and we’ll take something out of the pockets of the executive team to set an example.”
In the Barclays case, the message may have been aimed primarily at regulators, a British public still furious over financial bailouts and even the House of Commons, which has been much more aggressive than Congress on issues of executive pay and threatened to hold hearings last year on Royal Bank of Scotland’s decision to award bonuses to top executives. In declining his bonus, Mr. Jenkins of Barclays spoke of “legacy litigation and conduct issues,” presumably referring to the scandal involving the rigging of the global benchmark interest rate Libor, which led to the ouster of his predecessor.
Still, however laudable Ms. Rometty’s and Mr. Jenkins’s sacrifices, and even if turning down bonuses does become a trend, leaving a bonus to the discretion of the chief executive does not get at the larger problem that many of them are overpaid. “It may be fine for the chief executive to waive a bonus,” Mr. Eaton said, “but it’s really the compensation committee of the board that should be more proactive, and not give one in the first place. Of course, from a public relations perspective, it looks better for the C.E.O. to turn it down.”