Tronc Feud Escalates as Billionaire Investor Demands Access to Records - The New York Times
Patrick Soon-Shiong, a billionaire doctor in Los Angeles and a major shareholder in the newspaper publisher Tronc, has sent a letter to Tronc’s board accusing the company of “poor corporate governance” and asking for access to its books and records.
The move escalates an increasingly public feud between Dr. Soon-Shiong, Tronc’s vice chairman, and Michael W. Ferro Jr., its nonexecutive chairman, who have vied to increase their stakes in the company in apparent attempts to outmaneuver each other for control.
Dr. Soon-Shiong’s investment firm, Nant Capital, invested $70.5 million last May to acquire roughly 13 percent of Tronc, then called Tribune Publishing, at $15 a share. The move was made as part of the company’s effort to fend off a takeover by Gannett. Gannett ultimately dropped its pursuit of Tronc — which owns The Los Angeles Times and The Chicago Tribune, among other newspapers — in November.
But this month, Tronc removed Dr. Soon-Shiong from the slate of directors whom shareholders can vote to elect at the company’s annual meeting in April. And last week, Tronc said it had agreed to buy back the 3.75 million shares held by the investment firm Oaktree Capital, a longtime shareholder in the company. As part of the filing announcing the agreement, Tronc said it was raising the cap on the stake that Mr. Ferro could acquire to 30 percent, from 25 percent.
In the letter from Dr. Soon-Shiong, which was obtained by The New York Times, his lawyer John B. Quinn asks Tronc’s board to amend the company’s agreement with Nant Capital to raise the limit on the firm’s stake to 30 percent as well. The letter also says that Nant Capital “is troubled by the company’s corporate governance, or lack thereof.” Nant believes that “poor corporate governance” is among the reasons that Tronc’s stock is trading “at a meaningful discount” to the price Nant paid for its shares, the letter adds. (The stock closed 1.2 percent higher at $13.88 on Monday.)
The letter, which was sent on Monday, raises a number of concerns, including that Tronc had moved forward the date of its annual meeting by more than 30 days, a decision the letter contends was “designed to limit shareholders’ ability to nominate directors.” The letter also says that Tronc’s board notified Dr. Soon-Shiong that it had not renominated him “only after the nomination window had closed.” That would have prevented Dr. Soon-Shiong from putting forward an alternate slate of directors.
In a statement, Tronc acknowledged it had received Dr. Soon-Shiong’s letter and denounced its claims. “We have reviewed it, have found it to be filled with misstatements and baseless innuendo, and intend to respond to Nant Capital as promptly as possible,” the statement said.
Along with sending the letter, Dr. Soon-Shiong has demanded access to Tronc’s books and records, including communications with board members and Tronc’s lawyers related to the company’s decision to move up the date of its annual meeting and to its purchase of shares from Oaktree, among other decisions. Dr. Soon-Shiong requested Tronc’s organizational documents, board minutes and audited and unaudited financial statements.
Under Mr. Ferro, a technology entrepreneur based in Chicago, Tronc has pushed a technology-driven approach to journalism, including the use of artificial intelligence and machine learning. Last year, he introduced a strategy for the company that involved opening bureaus for The Los Angeles Times in Lagos, Nigeria, and in Hong Kong.
Although Tronc’s stock price has increased since Mr. Ferro bought a $44 million stake in Tronc last year — he paid $8.50 a share — the company has reported relatively uninspiring financial results. Total revenue last year was down 4 percent, to $1.6 billion. Advertising revenue for the publishing businesses was down 11 percent while advertising revenue for the digital divisions was up 1 percent.