For Disney’s Iger, an Unlikely Political Turn - The New York Times
BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. — Before the Trump presidency, who could have imagined that the Walt Disney Company would find itself at the fiery center of the American political debate?
It’s the Magic Kingdom. The home of Mickey and Minnie. Fairy tale princesses and Jedis. It gives us family-friendly Broadway musicals and endless hours of sports on television.
The fifth-most-admired company in the world, according to Fortune, now finds itself in the middle of the culture wars that have broken out over the president’s approach to race, the media, health care, climate change and gun violence, not to mention the appropriateness of athletes’ taking a knee in protest during the national anthem.
Robert A. Iger, the 66-year-old chief executive of this entertainment giant, is starting to find his voice on matters having nothing to do with PG-rated blockbusters or amusement park rides. And he is emerging as a credible contender in the 2020 presidential speculation game.
The entry of the mild-mannered Mr. Iger and his squeaky-clean company into the arena shows how President Trump has a way of drawing people and corporations once considered apolitical into the red-hot center.
The first slogan for Disneyland, coined by Walt Disney himself, was “The Happiest Place on Earth.” As the company grew into a global brand, it maintained its association with fantasy and fun by avoiding political turbulence whenever possible.
This is the company that fired the comedian Bill Maher from his late-night television slot after the uproar he caused for arguing in 2001 that the Sept. 11 terrorists weren’t “cowardly” the way the United States was when it lobbed cruise missiles at targets from afar. The company refused to distribute its Miramax Film division’s Michael Moore film, “Fahrenheit 9/11,” because of its criticism of President George W. Bush and his prosecution of the Iraq war.
Yet when Jemele Hill, a host on the Disney-owned ESPN cable network, called President Trump a “white supremacist” in a tweet after Mr. Trump’s equivocal comments on the white nationalist march in Charlottesville, Va., in August, ESPN called it “inappropriate” but made no move to discipline her.
After Mr. Trump scolded the National Football League and its owners for some players’ protests during the national anthem, ESPN commentators like Rex Ryan didn’t hold back. “I supported Trump, and I’m appalled at these comments,” he said.
No less surprising has been the leeway the company has given the talk show host Jimmy Kimmel, who holds down the 11:30 p.m. time slot at the Disney-owned ABC, to go after Mr. Trump and the Republicans.
Having won over his audience with an average-guy demeanor, Mr. Kimmel found his inner firebrand when Mr. Trump led the fight to repeal the Affordable Health Care Act, a failed gambit that coincided with the late-night host’s learning that his infant son had been born with a heart defect. Mr. Kimmel, who grew up in Las Vegas, returned to political commentary with an emotional critique of the Republicans’ failure to address gun violence in the wake of the mass shooting that tore apart his hometown last week.
Before his attacks on ESPN and the late-night crew, Mr. Trump singled out ABC News anchors for nasty criticism, calling its chief anchor George Stephanopoulos “Little George” and telling the ABC News weekend anchor Tom Llamas, “You’re a sleaze.”
So it made for fascinating viewing when Mr. Iger showed up in Beverly Hills last week to sit for a question and answer session at Vanity Fair’s annual New Establishment Summit, a two-day schmoozefest for the machers of Hollywood, Silicon Valley and Wall Street.
Ordinarily at these sorts of events, it’s a chief executive’s job to say just enough to promote his brand — but not enough to offend shareholders, board members, employees and customers.
For Mr. Iger, who looked tall and fit in a crisp white shirt and navy blue cardigan, the talk was as much about hot-button politics as it was about how he intended to navigate cord-cutting and the rise of Netflix.
Speaking on the stage of the Annenberg Center for the Performing Arts, he defended the decision to refrain from disciplining Ms. Hill by saying, “I felt we needed to take into account what other people at ESPN were feeling at this time, and that resulted in not taking action.”
On gun control, after the Las Vegas massacre — in which one Disney employee was shot dead and another was shot in the lung — Mr. Iger said, “In this day and age, we get outraged when an athlete doesn’t stand for the national anthem — where’s the outrage here?”
Then there was the presidential question, which his inquisitor, the Vanity Fair writer Nick Bilton, posed while noting that he had been asked to avoid the subject.
Wincing a bit, the executive mentioned that his wife, the journalist Willow Bay, didn’t love the idea, before saying of his post-Disney future, “I’ll figure it out when I have to figure it out.” (Mr. Iger is scheduled to step down from Disney in 2019.)
It wasn’t a “yes,” but it wasn’t a “no,” either.
I had the chance to catch up with Mr. Iger at a Vanity Fair after-party at the Bouchon Bistro, an outpost for the media and show business elite in Beverly Hills.
I cornered Mr. Iger while he was sitting on a couch drinking a glass of white wine, as waiters delivered trays of lamb sliders and shrimp cocktail to a crowd that included Monica Lewinsky, the HBO chief Richard Plepler and Walter Isaacson, the Aspen Institute president and Steve Jobs biographer.
Brooklyn-born and Long Island-bred, Mr. Iger started out as a production assistant and worked his way up the Disney ladder, with a compensation package of $43.9 million last year. He has a slight New York accent that could help offset his otherwise polished presentation, if he were to run for public office.
I told him I had never seen Disney, or a Disney chief executive, so deep in the political mix. Mr. Iger himself, after all, quit his post on a White House advisory council, in protest of Mr. Trump’s decision to pull out of the Paris climate accords. In September, he called the president’s decision to rescind the Obama-era program allowing the children of undocumented immigrants to remain in the United States — officially called Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA — “cruel and misguided.” (Adding to the sense that Mr. Iger has politics on the brain, records show he switched his party registration from Democrat to no party preference last year.)
He didn’t necessarily agree with me, though he didn’t quite deny it.
He told me he had his limits, including with Mr. Kimmel, whose passion regarding guns and health care Mr. Iger said he appreciated. “That show is to entertain and, frankly, I understand him talking about Vegas, because that’s where he grew up,” Mr. Iger told me. “But I think he should be careful.”
His own positions, he said, were mostly about business during these “highly charged times.”
“I took a position on immigration and DACA because of how it affected the company,” he said. “And I took a position on climate change, actually the Paris accords, for the same reason.”
Mr. Iger’s name has been bandied about for months by those who track politics, as my colleague James B. Stewart noted in March, when he mentioned Mr. Iger as one of the chief executives who seemed like potential White House material given Mr. Trump’s success running as a business person with no political experience.
Mr. Trump was the head of a private company who had himself for a boss. Mr. Iger runs a public company, with shareholders and a board to answer to. That makes a run a trickier proposition, though the Disney stock price, four times higher than it was when Mr. Iger took over in 2005, could give him some leeway.
And as the overseer of such a sprawling company, Mr. Iger could see any number of unexpected issues pop up during a campaign. For instance, for many years Disney owned Miramax, the film company, and one of its founders, Harvey Weinstein, is now accused of having sexually harassed several women (Mr. Iger took over as the Disney chief executive after Mr. Weinstein broke from Disney).
I have no idea whether Mr. Iger will run. It’s probably too early even for him to know. But the speculation says something about the political moment — that during a presidency that lives and breathes in the media space, a major media executive is just as viable a White House challenger as any sitting senator.
Mr. Iger may not ultimately run into the political storm. That doesn’t mean it isn’t barreling toward him.