Rockie’s Game-Winning Homer Completes Cycle Against the Giants - The New York Times
Nolan Arenado completed the cycle with a three-run homer in the bottom of the ninth inning on Sunday, and the Colorado Rockies stunned the San Francisco Giants, rallying for a 7-5 victory in Denver.
Arenado hit the first pitch he saw from the All-Star closer Mark Melancon into the left-field seats to complete a four-game sweep by the Rockies, who have the best record in the National League. Arenado was mobbed at home plate by his teammates, with a sellout crowd chanting, “M.V.P.! M.V.P.!”
Melancon retired his first batter but then gave up three singles and the tying run. Up next was Arenado, who had tripled in the first, singled in the fourth and had a run-scoring double in the sixth. He hit a 91-mile-per-hour fastball for his 15th homer and his first career cycle.
AROUND THE MAJORS Jimmy Nelson struck out 10 in his first career complete game, and the host Milwaukee Brewers got home runs from Hernan Perez and Manny Pina to edge the San Diego Padres, 2-1. Kyle Seager drove in three runs with three doubles as the Seattle Mariners beat the host Texas Rangers, 7-3. John Lackey and three relievers combined on a three-hitter, Anthony Rizzo homered among his three hits, and the Chicago Cubs rolled past the Pirates, 7-1, in Pittsburgh. Rey Fuentes hit his first major league home run in the 10th inning, lifting the Arizona Diamondbacks to a 5-4 victory over the host Philadelphia Phillies.
LOUISVILLE WINS AT C.W.S. Colby Fitch drove in four runs, Sam Bordner shut down Texas A&M after it cut Louisville’s five-run lead to one, and the Cardinals beat the Aggies, 8-4, at the College World Series in Omaha.
The Cardinals will play Tuesday against Florida, which defeated Texas Christian, 3-0, on Sunday night. The Aggies will play T.C.U. in an elimination game, also on Tuesday.
The title contenders Portugal and Mexico fought to a 2-2 draw in the Confederations Cup, with each team scoring in the final five minutes in Kazan, Russia. Portugal’s Cédric Soares scored on a deflected shot in the 86th minute, but Héctor Moreno tied it with a header in stoppage time.
Cristiano Ronaldo set up Ricardo Quaresma’s opening goal for Portugal, and Javier Hernández, who is known as Chicharito, tied the score for Mexico just before halftime. The result left Portugal, the European champion, and Mexico, winner of the Gold Cup, trailing host Russia in Group A.
In a Group B match in Moscow, Arturo Vidal brushed off a disputed video review to give Chile a 2-0 victory over Cameroon.
A RED BULLS SHUTOUT Bradley Wright-Phillips scored in the 87th minute and in stoppage time to lift the Red Bulls past the Philadelphia Union, 2-0, in Chester, Pa. The Red Bulls (7-7-2) had a man advantage starting in the 53rd minute.
The Tennessee Titans agreed to terms on a one-year deal with wide receiver Eric Decker, who was released this month by the Jets after three seasons with the team. Decker, who was limited to three games last year because of hip and shoulder injuries, has three 1,000-yard seasons.
Kyle Larson took control on a restart with five laps remaining and earned his second Nascar Cup Series victory of the season, holding off Chase Elliott at the FireKeepers Casino 400 in Brooklyn, Mich. Larson and Elliott also finished 1-2 at Michigan International Speedway last August.
PORSCHE AVOIDS LE MANS UPSET Timo Bernhard led Porsche to a third straight win at the 24 Hours of Le Mans in France, avoiding a huge upset by the lower-category Oreca.
Oreca competes in Le Mans’s Prototype 2 category and suddenly found itself in the lead, with the 19-year-old Thomas Laurent behind the wheel, three hours from the end of the grueling endurance race. But Bernhard, 36, racing for Porsche in the faster and more powerful Le Mans Prototype 1 category, overtook Laurent with about an hour left.
Brooke Henderson won the Meijer L.P.G.A. Classic for her fourth tour title, holding off Michelle Wie and Lexi Thompson by two strokes in Grand Rapids, Mich. Henderson, a 19-year-old Canadian, closed with a 66 on a course that was reduced to a par 69 during the final two rounds because of flooding. She finished at 17-under 263.
Lucas Pouille of France defeated Spain’s Feliciano López, 6-4, 6-7 (5), 6-4, to win the Stuttgart Open in Germany. The No. 4-seeded Pouille, who was given a wild card to play in the grass-court tournament, hit 29 aces and saved six of seven break points before claiming his third title.
Simon Spilak won his second Tour of Switzerland while Rohan Dennis finished first in the closing time trial in Schaffhausen. Spilak, who also won the title in 2015, took a 52-second lead on Damiano Caruso into the final day, and he finished four seconds behind Caruso in fifth place.