Baseball Makes Changes to Speed Up Game (but Only a Little) - The New York Times
Major League Baseball and the players’ union on Thursday announced a package of changes to the rules to speed up the game. But don’t expect to go to the park this season to see a brisk two-and-a-half-hour game. The changes are mostly minor and do not appear likely to make a dramatic impact on the pace of play.
(Baseball does not seem to have been influenced by the publication this week of New York Times staff and reader suggestions for improvement. Not even the idea of starting every inning with Bartolo Colon on second base.)
In the change that is likely to be most noticeable to fans, the time-honored ritual of throwing four pitchouts for an intentional walk is no more. Managers will now merely signal the umpire, and the batter will take his base.
So no more of this:
Baseball also responded to complaints about the speed of the replay system with several changes. Managers will now have only 30 seconds to decide whether to make a replay challenge, which will make it more difficult for them to quickly study video before making their decision.
The replay officials will now have a two-minute time limit to make their decisions, although the league said there would be “various exceptions,” which makes you think the five-minute replay delay is not extinct.
In other changes unrelated to game speed, teams will no longer be allowed to place any sort of markers on the field to help with defensive alignment. Last season, the Mets lodged a complaint with the commissioner’s office after learning the Dodgers planned to mark defensive positions at Citi Field.
There was also an adjustment to the balk rule and where base coaches may stand.
Baseball must get union approval for rule changes, and the players’ union signed off on these. But Commissioner Rob Manfred wanted more, he said.
“I believe it’s a mistake to stick our head in the sand and ignore the fact that our game has changed and continues to change,” Manfred said.
Tony Clark, the executive director of the players’ union, had said that he would rather educate fans on the game than make major changes.
“I reject the notion that we can ‘educate fans’ to embrace the game as it’s currently played,” Manfred said last month.
“We couldn’t even make an agreement on limiting the number of times somebody goes to the mound,” he said.
Among the changes that will not be made, though they very likely would have made a real impact on the pace of the game, were limits on players’ calling timeouts, a pitch clock and limits on pitching changes.
Commercial time between innings will also remain the same, as expected.
The new rules in full:
■ The start of a no-pitch intentional walk, allowing the defensive team’s manager to signal a decision to the home plate umpire to intentionally walk the batter. After the signal of the manager’s intention, the umpire will immediately award first base to the batter.
■ A 30-second limit for a manager to decide whether to challenge a play and invoke replay review.
■ When a manager has exhausted his challenges for the game, crew chiefs may now invoke replay review for non-home run calls beginning in the eighth inning instead of the seventh inning.
■ A conditional two-minute guideline for replay officials to render a decision on a replay review, allowing various exceptions.
■ A prohibition on the use of any markers on the field that could create a tangible reference system for fielders.
■ An addition to Rule 5.07 formalizes an umpire interpretation by stipulating that a pitcher may not take a second step toward home plate with either foot or otherwise reset his pivot foot in his delivery of the pitch. If there is at least one runner on base, then such an action will be called as a balk under Rule 6.02(a). If the bases are unoccupied, then it will be considered an illegal pitch under Rule 6.02(b).
■ An amendment to Rule 5.03 requires base coaches to position themselves behind the line of the coach’s box closest to home plate and the front line that runs parallel to the foul line before each pitch. Once a ball is put in play, a base coach is allowed to leave the coach’s box to signal a player so long as the coach does not interfere with play.