A Long Hardwood Journey - The New York Times
You know that we’re not running the correct out-of-bounds play, right? That our defensive press is a mess? That we’re close to another loss?
Coach Marc Skelton leaned in close, his eyes inches from those of his teenage players, his questions pregnant with expletives. He had paced, implored, tossed his arms in the air, yelled and, for punctuation, whacked his clipboard like a zydeco musician with a washboard. Combustion seemed a real and present danger.
It was December, and Skelton’s basketball team, the Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School Panthers, had traveled across the South Bronx to a rival team’s gym.
“Fellas, you are in the lion’s den,” Skelton yelled into the din, with another flourish of profanity. “Now you have to kill the lion!”
Skelton directed his players to double-team the top three opposing scorers, who were talented shooters but not great passers. They rely on chaos; respond by playing methodically.
The Fannie Lou defense stiffened. As Skelton forecast, the opposing guards hoisted long, contested shots.
The Panthers won, 76-66.
For a few minutes, the Panthers had played the Fannie Lou way, as preached and codified by Skelton, and secured a victory that had almost slithered out of their grasp.
The boys gathered in a tiny locker room to listen to Skelton’s valedictory remarks — incisive, with a bit of praise and scalding criticism. He never sugarcoats. Then they pulled on coats, scarves, hats and hoodies and filed into the frigid darkness.
Skelton stepped into the night, hauling a duffel filled with jerseys he had bought with money raised from friends and family members. He would wash the uniforms at home.
One of the most successful public school coaches in New York City, he places emphasis less on athleticism than on chesslike analysis, film study and team play. He digs deep into the psyches of his players, to the point that some talk of him — to his discomfort — as being akin to a father.
No Fannie Lou player has gone on to play college basketball at a top-tier program. But in this poor and working-class corner of the South Bronx, Skelton’s teams have amassed a 100 percent graduation rate and a formidable winning tradition. Last year, Fannie Lou, a small school of 386 students, came within a missed shot of a city championship. The previous year, Fannie Lou went 29-4 and won the championship.
At this point in the 2014-15 season, Skelton’s team was 4-2 and moving sideways, which works for crabs but not basketball teams. His starting lineup had a junior, three sophomores and a freshman, which in high school terms amounted to a team in swaddling cloth.
“This is my most physically gifted team,” Skelton told me at the time. “But they are so young and inconsistent.”
He traveled back to the apartment he shares with his wife, Jessica, and their 6-year-old daughter, Nina, in Hudson Heights, perched on the bluffs of northern Manhattan. He read to Nina until she drifted off to sleep.
Then Skelton sat in his living room and studied video, charting passes and shots — how many 3-pointers the opponent took, and where and when. He examined turnovers, contested shots and broken plays and sent a detailed email, along with a video to each player. He fell asleep after midnight and awakened later to ruminate more.
Skelton harbors a conviction bordering on religious belief that he can sell his teenage boys on the beauty of basketball well played. Just maybe, in the 2014-15 season, they would compete for that championship again in March. He invited me to chronicle their journey.
“One of the thrills of coaching is trying to rebuild the boat while in the middle of the sea with the ballast shifting,” he said, smiling at his overwrought metaphor. “The other possibility is the crew gets rickets and we capsize.”
Skelton has turned the corner on 40 years old. A social studies teacher, he learned Russian while with the Peace Corps in Moldova. He adores Dostoyevsky and Gogol and teaches a spring class at Fannie Lou in Russian history: Ivan the Terrible, Peter the Great and all that.
He also loves Herman Melville, from whose port his nautical metaphors take sail. To pursue the championships is to “harpoon the whale,” Skelton said.
His teenage players don’t always understand him. They do drink in his passion and vow to achieve playoff glory.
They are so young. As Melville wrote of such voyages, “It is not down in any map; true places never are.”
“So who knows who Nick Van Exel was?”
Skelton, in a tie-dye Lithuanian Olympic team T-shirt, was talking to players trying out in early October. The teenagers stole looks. Who? (Van Exel last played in the N.B.A. when these boys were 6 years old.)
“Right — how could you know him?” Skelton said, half to the teenagers and half to himself. “Alonzo Mourning. Any better?”
One player raised his hand tentatively, but Skelton didn’t notice. Everyone did sprints and dribbling drills, then more sprints and push-ups and defensive drills.
The Panthers’ gym is a closet. High-arching jump shots sometimes hit a heating duct. When players sit on the bench during games, their toes extend onto the court like a row of toy boats.
Skelton explained offensive and defensive sets, which he had collected from around the globe — the Flying Death Machine, the Lithuania Needle and so on. He has five out-of-bounds plays and three defensive presses. In whispers, juniors and seniors translated for the younger players who, wide-eyed, looked as if they had wandered into a class in advanced Latin.
“This is hard, Charles,” Skelton said to Charles Davis, a gangling and talented freshman forward. He turned to the rest of the team. “Charles is not going to understand this until he’s a junior.”
“Welcome to Fannie Lou basketball,” Skelton added.
Varsity basketball tryouts for many successful programs are variations on Hollywood casting calls. A hundred teenage boys try to impress with fancy shots, jukes, one-handed rebounds. At tiny Fannie Lou Hamer, just 26 students tried out, the curious, the overweight and the too eager. All but the core players were new.
Skelton prefers teaching his crew from scratch. “You’re going to see both sides of the mirror, including my own,” he told the teenagers. “I’m going to test your commitment to basketball. At some point this season, you’re going to hate basketball. I guarantee it.”
Skelton is among a cluster of New York coaches, men and women, who study the game with a Talmudic intensity. They attend conferences, write for websites and have taught at basketball camps. They disdain zombie ball, the mindless up and down, and that ESPN-fed apotheosis known as hero ball, in which star players try to win — but often lose — games on their own.
They study the work of Princeton’s legendary Pete Carril and the Cleveland Cavaliers’ coach, David Blatt (LeBron James’s complaints to the contrary, Blatt is revered as an innovator). They steal one another’s plays and techniques, and keep a wary eye on new rivals.
There was talk early in the season of a wunderkind female coach at Maspeth High School in Queens, whose senior-heavy squad executed her game plan with precision and savvy, and gorgeous jump shooting. Her team would deal postseason pain to someone in March.
Skelton stresses rigorous preparation. His goal is to impose his considerable will on a game. Teams must play at the Panthers’ speed, intense and physical. He seeks to break an opponent, emotionally and physically.
“He is very smart, and his kids are coming at you, and they are fighting to the death,” said Ben Newman, the coach of the New York City Lab School for Collaborative Studies, who is a successful and friendly rival. (They often exchange notes on other teams.) “It’s a fun, complicated game to coach against him.”
Jorge Jimenez, 17, scampered up the court during tryouts. He had arrived at Fannie Lou as a freshman moppet, a player so slight that the basketball looked like a beach ball in his hands. He could shoot 3-pointers, and to his surprise, Skelton selected him. He is intensely close to his mother, a Dominican immigrant; his sisters; his baby brother; and his girlfriend, Jaileen.
Jorge can play defense with less than full determination. Skelton yelled. Jorge listened and smiled.
“As a freshman, I was like: ‘Are you serious? I cannot believe him,’ ” Jorge recalled with a smile. “Then I get used to him. That’s what makes him a great coach: He’s so intense. I respect him like a father.”
Shateek Myrick, talented with a coltish shyness, was also at the tryouts. The previous season, he brooded until he hit a big shot in the playoffs. Last summer, he and Tim Hariston, the team’s hulking center, gathered at midnight, laid down cones on a playground court, and ran dribbling and shooting drills choreographed by Skelton.
A sophomore, Shateek had a chance to be a core player this season. Or not. He can be as emotionally taut as a piano wire.
“I was blue last year; I was hard on myself,” Shateek said. “Marc told me to leave. Maybe I wasn’t ready for the team. He said I had to put the team first, before girls, before anything.”
Shateek nearly left the team. Skelton knew where he was, and Shateek knew that. In this small school, the ties between staff and student, coach and player, are intense and familial.
“Coach rebuilt me,” he said. “Marc understands me, and I think I understand him.”
Decades ago, the horsemen of white flight, abandonment and arson galloped through the South Bronx, and AIDS, smack and crack marched hard on their heels. Residents battled back, city officials rallied, and neighborhoods were resurrected. Once surrounded by rubble, Fannie Lou Hamer High School is a symbol of that regeneration.
Its leaders refuse to install metal detectors, and the security guards know every student by first name. The school has a partnership with the Children’s Aid Society, and together they tutor students and counsel families. They help families overrun by poverty construct budgets and assist students in applying for financial aid for college.
Few Fannie Lou students score high on the standardized tests that prematurely define too many lives. Fannie Lou relies on portfolios rather than tests. Teenagers write, edit and rewrite. The school has won national awards for its ability to electrify lives.
Life here is no Hallmark card. Basketball success has not bred a great neighborhood following for the Panthers; few parents and friends attend games. This season, one player’s family would become homeless. A father would lose his job. A star player would sustain an injury, grow depressed and academically tumble away.
Days before the season began, Skelton relied on a freshman point guard as his starter, a risky approach. In a system as complicated as Skelton’s, a point guard is like a computer modem — a good one makes everything work.
Then Kobe Boateng walked through the doors at Fannie Lou Hamer in late October, fresh from Florida. Short, lean and quiet as a dormouse, he sat with the assistant principal as she leafed through his transcript and tried to engage him. I love to play basketball, he told her. I’m a point guard.
She led him to Skelton’s class.
In Kobe’s hands, the basketball is like a yo-yo. He remains crouched and close to the ground, and his feeling for the ball is polished. He loves to pass and plays defense with a bloodhound’s intensity.
Kobe also had an awkward line drive of a jump shot and knew not a play of Skelton’s offense. He tossed the ball ahead to Jorge, figuring the guard would cut to the hoop. In Skelton’s offense, Jorge remains camped at the 3-point line, where he shoots a reliably high percentage. Kobe’s pass sailed out of bounds. He dealt the ball to Rory Brown, a talented forward, too far from the hoop. That led to a turnover.
In the cafeteria after practice, I asked Kobe how he had come to live in Florida. His eyes were downcast, his voice barely above a whisper.
“My grades weren’t so good,” he said. “I went to Florida to live with my basketball coach.”
You dig deeper in that soil.
Kobe lived in a handsome house on 225th Street in the North Bronx, with his older sister and younger brother and his parents, who were Ghanaian immigrants. His mother cooked delicious Ghanaian stews, hugged him before he slept and, when she had parent business to discuss, talked in Twee with his father, who drove a city bus.
She fell ill, and Kobe visited her in the hospital. Even hooked to tubes, she could always make him smile. Then she died of breast cancer. His father began working double shifts to pay the mortgage.
Kobe drifted toward the wrong crowd and started skipping school. His grades, often good, deteriorated.
“I was alone in the world,” he said.
One day he wandered by the home of his favorite youth basketball coach, Robert Arce. A truck driver, Arce was packing up his family — his son and Kobe had been close friends since grade school — and preparing to move to Florida. Can I come with you? Kobe asked.
It was as if Kobe were tossing himself a life preserver.
“I knew Kobe was not himself,” Arce said. “He could not bear to knock on the door to his own home.”
Arce talked to Kobe’s father, who agreed.
Kobe flew to Orlando. He could not play varsity basketball because of his grades in the Bronx, so he did a lot of homework, and in late afternoon, he walked between rows of palm trees to the local basketball court.
“It was so quiet,” Kobe recalled. “I could hear my own thoughts.”
A year passed. One evening last October, Kobe asked Arce to talk. I need to go home, Kobe said. “He really missed his little brother,” Arce said. “He was so emotional.”
Arce put an arm around Kobe’s shoulder. You are family. Our door is open to you always.
A few days later, Kobe boarded a flight for New York City.
Perhaps he would be the missing piece for that playoff run.
A basketball season is a grinding trek, influenced by all of the attendant dramas of teenage life. Skelton talks with guidance counselors and school aides and tries to keep track of his players’ quarrels, grades, breakups with girlfriends and family schisms.
Skelton knows his younger players will bridle and buck at his intense and demanding style; he has a thick hide and requires that of his players. The teenagers speak with respect of his teaching, but inevitably some grow furious with him in the gym.
“No one signs up for heartbreak,” Skelton said, “but it’s all but guaranteed.”
Fannie Lou Hamer Freedom High School opened its season against Truman High, a large AA-division school with players who could compete for major college teams. Fannie Lou is in the B division of the Public Schools Athletic League.
Skelton’s teams had beaten A-division behemoths in the past, relying on discipline and sophisticated playmaking to leap the talent gap.
The center for Truman was massive. The young Fannie Lou players drove the lane against him and went airborne, and he blocked one shot after another. It was like watching children hurl themselves against a wall.
The Panthers tossed the ball around like a Frisbee. “Rory! Rory!” Skelton yelled. “Stop the ball!” Rory did not stop the ball, and there was another turnover. The Panthers made a spirited run but lost by 15 points.
Afterward, the Panthers listened, glum. Skelton spoke of developing a reciprocal trust that would allow them to see open teammates. As it happened, vision presented a literal as well as metaphorical challenge. Truman’s gym — typical of city public schools — is cavernous and dimly lit, with peeling paint. The feeling is like playing inside a grainy black-and-white television.
At least five Fannie Lou players wear glasses in the classroom, but their families cannot afford to replace broken eyeglasses.
Rory is an inside slasher with deft hands; he leaves his glasses in a jacket during games. “Honestly,” he said, “sometimes I had to look really carefully to see if I was passing to the right guy.”
Typically, a Skelton team mucks about for a month or two and then rounds into shape as players focus their minds on the sprint to the playoffs. Not this year. His team of young colts settled into a maddening and rhythmless pattern of good wins and dispiriting losses. Girls, pot, a hostile crowd, mediocre referees: All were distractions.
The Panthers trailed at halftime of a December game, and the players raged about bad calls. Skelton, impatient, waved his hands at them.
“Fellas!” he said. “Blind referees are built in Hunts Point. They wander the streets until the P.S.A.L. hires them. You can’t do anything about that.”
The room fell silent as players puzzled that out. “The coach-player dialectic is like mercury in a thermometer,” Skelton said later. “I need to be the most consistent one in the gym.”
Which is not to suggest that Coach is immune to mood swings. After beating a team by 75-31, Skelton sent me an email: “We’re improving faster than microchips.”
Seven days later, the Panthers lost to a rival. Skelton emailed again: “It was a complete disaster. We are in a malaise and playing without fire.”
The team was tightknit with no rebels. The players exchanged special handshakes in the hallways and gathered on the team’s Facebook site at night to gossip and dissect the games. When Jorge’s mother traveled to the Dominican Republic to remarry, she begged Jorge to leave school for weeks and accompany her.
He adored her but he refused. He was a starter on a team that valued cohesiveness, and he wanted to be college bound. “I told my mom, ‘I love you, but I have obligations,’ ” he said.
Players for some opposing teams sat on the bench and checked their phones, laughed, sulked and ogled girls. The Fannie Lou players locked arms and clapped. “You peer at a bench, and you can see a team’s soul,” Skelton said.
Managing personalities is a precarious business. The Panthers’ two seniors, Ken Duran and Bari Higinio, were college bound and analytic, akin to assistant coaches. They played little. The younger players lacked an alpha dog. Against Douglass Academy, Skelton watched Shateek, his best shooter and a sophomore who commits every play to memory, grow tentative. Each time he made a bad pass or took a bad shot, he glanced over to monitor Skelton’s reaction.
Skelton stamped his foot. “Shateek! What the hell? Take a seat!”
Shateek wandered off the court, past the bench and into the shadowed hallway. He rested his forehead against a brick wall. Five minutes later, he returned to the bench.
Skelton walked to the end of the bench without looking at him.
“You ready?”
Yes, Shateek replied.
Soon Shateek was rebounding and whipping a beauty of a pass. The Panthers scored the best win of the young season. Shateek, what were you thinking out in the hallway?
“I was thinking I better get back into that gym,” he said.
Did Coach notice you leave?
Shateek shrugged, fatalistic. “Coach sees everything.”
Weeks later, I asked Skelton if he had noticed Shateek leaving. He smiled. “Yeah, Teek’s coat was behind the bench, so I knew he’d come back.”
Skelton talks of titling his memoir “Diary of a Mad Coach.” His path to the Bronx was defiantly nonlinear. Raised in New Hampshire, an all-state high school shooting guard, he planned to complete his Peace Corps tour and apply to medical school.
He boarded his flight to Moldova and sat next to Jessica, a pretty and intelligent woman who was heading to her own Peace Corps posting. They talked intently for hours. She told him of her father and brother, two doctors. She loved them but not the doctor’s lifestyle.
What, she asked Skelton, what would you like to do after the Peace Corps? He paused carefully and looked at her.
Oh, he replied, I’d like to be a teacher.
They have been married almost 10 years.
Skelton arrived in New York with no desire to teach upper-middle-class students; he wanted teenagers who would challenge his assumptions. He targeted schools in the Bronx for job interviews and discovered Fannie Lou, where a dynamic principal was committed to a different educational path.
“I wanted to work in the most difficult environment, where a teacher is needed,” he said. “I was lucky enough to find a school where the ethos was to allow you to exercise so many aspects of who you are.”
As he has earned master’s degrees in Russian studies, science education and political science, he has thought of teaching college. Each September, though, he finds himself walking back through the door at Fannie Lou.
At a mid-January film session, Shateek complained that he did not like the responsibility of tossing in the ball from out of bounds. It made him tense, he said. He preferred to roam the court.
Skelton cut him off. “I understand,” he said. “Sometimes I want to be teaching Russian literature, and that hasn’t happened. But we needed a computer teacher to better prepare students for life, and I opened my big mouth.
“I have the ability to teach computers, and we needed it, and I did it. Get it?”
Shateek nodded, warily.
Winter settled in. During winter vacation, teammates were pressed into babysitting. Family tensions surfaced. Players become distracted. Skelton grew edgy; the Panthers were near the bell lap in their race for the playoffs.
The best teams press the accelerator pedal. In Queens, the Maspeth basketball team opened January by posting winning margins of 25 and 16 points.
Fannie Lou’s second game after the break was against South Bronx Prep, which it had beaten in years past. The Panthers led at halftime but collapsed and lost.
Marquis Clark, a sophomore and the star of the early season, shot 1 for 10 from the field. He hurt his knee, and players carried him to the bench. He had begun his tumble. In weeks to come, he would injure his ankle, his grades would slip, and he would lose his eligibility to play.
The Panthers and South Bronx Prep talked trash all game. Afterward, Tim, the Fannie Lou center, followed the opposing team outside. Burly and 6 feet 8 inches, he is a usually good-natured student who leads his teammates in pregame chants.
But he had grown frustrated with his poor play and begun texting late-night apologies to Skelton. Tim and the teenagers from the opposing team exchanged taunts as they climbed the stairway to the elevated subway tracks, alongside the Bronx River. Shateek and Rory tried to hold Tim back.
The police separated the quarreling teenagers before anyone could land a punch.
Skelton learned of the trouble that night. He convened his team the next day. Shateek was almost in tears. “I told Timmy, ‘You’re angry because you aren’t playing well,’ ” Shateek said. “ ‘You think Marc’s going to play you because you’re tough?’ ”
Skelton agreed.
“That’s the wrong kind of toughness, fellas,” Skelton said.
Shateek raised his hand. Would the P.S.A.L. suspend Timmy?
Skelton shook his head. “I have suspended him.”
A couple of years ago, Skelton suspended his leading scorer and the rest of his starting five. He is raising young men, not ballplayers. That team reached the championship game.
A century ago, the Fannie Lou building — on Jennings Street, next to the Sheridan Expressway — was a factory that employed tuberculosis patients. Today freshmen and sophomores pass their days in the same classrooms, a school within a school. Struggling students are assigned a tutor.
In May, Fannie Lou was awarded a national award for its work.
Nathan Larsen, the assistant principal, gave me a tour. A bearded son of a farmer from Iowa, Larsen, who did graduate work in religion at Oxford University, serves as Skelton’s advance scout. He films coming opponents. Skelton slices the videos into bites for his players and prepares scouting reports.
“It connects to the way we teach here,” Larsen said. “Marc asks students to study film, before and after games, and to reflect.”
Luis Padilla, an ebullient school aide supervisor, is the other assistant. Years ago, Padilla listened as Skelton excoriated a player for jogging through drills. When the player walked to the bench, head down, Padilla grilled him, too.
“Marc pulled me aside and said, ‘I do all the yelling,’ ” Padilla recalled. “ ‘I want my assistants to be the guys who pick the players up and build their self-esteem.’
“Marc’s the law. We give the love.”
All winter, the Panthers climbed Sisyphean hills, playing intelligently for stretches only to fall apart. Jorge, the best shooter, collided with a big defender and bounced across the floor as if tossed out a car. He lost two weeks to a concussion.
By February, their playoff hopes were on life support.
Skelton had trouble sleeping. Jessica, his wife, watched the toll. “It’s not easy; you see it eating at him,” she said. “I keep reminding him that this is a really young group.”
The Panthers played Bathgate at a community center. A pool downstairs gave a humid February-in-Manila feel to the seemingly closet-size gym.
The Panthers should have beaten this team. Instead they piled mistake atop mistake. Skelton was irate.
“Honey?”
The mother of a Bathgate player leaned in behind Skelton and spoke into his ear. “Honey, you need to get your nails done and chill.”
The next day, Skelton gathered his players in a circle at midcourt in the Fannie Lou gym. We’re 9-7 in division play, he told them in a voice grown hoarse. You haven’t run a good break in weeks. Why don’t you just toss your uniforms into the circle, and we can call it a season? You won’t have to listen to me, and you’ll have more time for your girlfriends.
Players swung their arms, nervous. Slowly, the teenagers spoke up.
“If we quit, my girlfriend might break up with me,” one said.
Skelton understood. Sort of.
“In the playoffs, we can be a sleeper,” Travis said quietly. A junior, Travis made the team on the last day of the preseason. He rarely played, but he knew every play. He watched N.B.A. and college basketball with an astute eye.
Skelton smiled faintly.
“We’re going to be a sleeper?” Skelton said. “We’ll be the team no one wants to face?”
The team nodded as one.
“I like it,” Skelton said. “The ride isn’t over until they kick us out.”
The Panthers demolished their next opponent by 38 points. Was it too late? In Queens, Maspeth and its senior-heavy squad was steamrollering opponents by 40 or more points.
The deadly teams of March are built in January and February.
Fannie Lou earned a playoff berth. The teenage vibrations had shifted. Practices were crisper. Older teenagers corrected the younger ones. Players listened intently.
Skelton dialed down anticipation. “Shateek, you’re too hungry. Breathe.” To Kobe: “Your speed is incredible. Sloooow down.”
Wham! Wham!
There was loud banging on the metal door. It was frigid outside, 13 degrees with gusting winds. The big center, Tim, walked in wearing shorts.
“Timmy?” Skelton looked horrified. “You didn’t wear pants?”
The Panthers’ first-round opponent was a team from Queens, Renaissance High School. It featured two swift, high-scoring shooting guards who dominated the ball.
Skelton was fine with that. “I like coaching against hero ball,” he said with a touch of pride.
His antidote was straightforward: Allow no one to dribble unimpeded to the hoop. Pressure the two star guards relentlessly and force them to take long shots or pass. Make other players take contested 2-point jump shots, a statistical loser’s bet.
The Panthers came out on fire. Kobe dished 10 assists. Shateek drained 3-pointers, leaving the net leaping. The gangling freshman, Charles, vacuumed up rebounds. The defense was stiff.
“Jesus Christ, fellas,” Skelton shouted. “That’s basketball!”
They celebrated. Then came ominous news. Fannie Lou’s next opponent would be Maspeth High School in Queens. Maspeth Coach Anastasia Bitis’s team was undefeated. It had not had won by fewer than 10 points.
Give yourself a night to feel great, Skelton advised his players.
Skelton scratched away with chalk on the board, putting up a scouting report. He had done his homework in the past 24 hours, scooping up information on Maspeth.
Maspeth is very well coached, another coach told Skelton. Playing against Bitis reminds me of playing you.
Skelton envisioned building a defensive barricade. Don’t wander out too far on Maspeth, he told his kids. Keep your hands up and in their face, but let them take those long 3-pointers. Cut off every route to the hoop.
Maspeth had not been in a close game, he told his players. If we stay within 5 points in the fourth quarter, they’ll crack. “We aren’t going to change the way we play,” Skelton said. “We are going to change the way they play.”
For the first time this season, Fannie Lou scraped together money for a little bus. On the trip to Queens, the Panthers’ players were silent, staring out at a frozen postindustrial landscape, the bones of old coat and linen factories visible, steam clouds rising from chimneys.
In Queens, they found a gorgeous new high school with a capacious gym. Sunlight slanted through windows. Speakers blasted Lupe Fiasco’s “Superstar” as Maspeth players hit practice shot after practice shot.
Skelton motioned his team to huddle up.
“Fellas, I’m going to repeat myself in case you lost something on the highway,” he said. “Just keep your heads.”
Maspeth got the opening tap. In a blink, it was 10-2. Then 17-2. “I could have called a timeout, but what was I supposed to say?” Skelton said later. “We were playing tough defense.”
The Panthers made a run — Shateek swatted a Maspeth shot into the rafters — but still trailed, 38-23, at halftime.
Skelton entered the locker room holding a stat sheet. “Guys, those shots of theirs are going to be missed in the fourth quarter,” he said. “I’m not burning timeouts, because we’re going to win this game.”
With 5:32 left, Fannie Lou had cut the Maspeth lead to 13.
Swish, swish and swish. Maspeth surged far ahead again. Skelton shook his head. “There can’t be a team that doesn’t miss, can there?” he wondered.
Maspeth won by 23.
“I can’t be happier,” Skelton told his players, red-eyed and crying, afterward. “You played hard to the final second.”
What could you have done differently? I asked Skelton. Not much, he said. If he underestimated anything, it was that youth was implacable.
“Maspeth rotated the ball beautifully and did all the little things our guys will do next year.” He smiled. “We learn. There are 1,000 ways to lose in the playoffs. I kind of like the way I lost.”
The players trailed into his classroom seeking summer homework. Skelton fashions drills for the summer, which he calls the “on season.” (Marc Skelton Dictum No. 1: Games are O.K., if you must, but you can take 10 times as many shots and dribbles in a good 45-minute practice.) Kobe would work on putting arc on his jumper; Rory on passing; Shateek on dribbling.
Skelton took his players to a basketball camp in late June; they had asked about it for months. “Let’s face it,” Rory said. “He’s kind of like a father to us.”
There was that word again: father. What did Skelton make of it?
Silence.
It’s a fraught question, emotionally, psychologically, perhaps racially, although the latter never surfaced directly. Even if his players, who are black and Latino, speak of him as more, Skelton, who is white, resists conceiving of himself as other than their coach. Most times, anyway.
A former player, a favorite, was recently released from jail after six months. “Guess where he came first?” Skelton said. “He’s been here every day since.”
He rubbed his head; he is not a gushy sort.
“Look, I understand who I am to these guys, and if I don’t, my wife reminds me, and so does my principal,” he said. “I love my job. But I’ve got my hands full with Nina. I’m parenting that little girl.”
Silence again.
“I’m parenting these young men, too. I know that.”
I asked Skelton how he would spend his summer. He would read the Russian writer Vasily Grossman’s “An Armenian Sketchbook,” and he would obsess a lot about basketball.
“They will be older, more mature, and they could win a city title next year,” Skelton said. “We know — they know — that chance doesn’t come every year.”
For these teenage boys and their coach, the pursuit of the whale is unrelenting.