Ike Davis, Back in New York, Leads Israel Past Britain in World Baseball Classic Qualifier - The New York Times
Ike Davis spoke Thursday about his affection for New York — the state and the city. He began his professional career with the Brooklyn Cyclones in this Coney Island stadium. Eventually, he would spend minor league seasons in Buffalo and Binghamton, and play in five seasons with the Mets and eight games with the Yankees.
“I’ve had too many seasons here to count,” Davis said. “New York has been my adult home.”
In his return to his first pro baseball home, Davis contributed to a four-run rally in the seventh inning, giving Israel a 5-2 victory over Britain in a tournament that will decide the final berth in the World Baseball Classic next March.
Davis, pinch-hitting, fouled off three straight 3-2 pitches from Nolan Bond and then banged a hard run-scoring single off the mound and up the middle to score Scott Burcham. That gave Israel a two-run lead, and Cody Decker added a sacrifice fly later in the inning.
“Pinch-hitting is never the easiest task,” Davis said. “He had a sneaky little fastball. I kept fouling it back, finally got a pitch I could handle.”
Israel, composed largely of Jewish American minor leaguers and former major leaguers, will next face Brazil on Friday in a game scheduled for noon, a starting time that assures completion before sunset and the Jewish Sabbath.
This qualifying tournament features a modified double-elimination format, and the winner will become the 16th and final team in the W.B.C. — placed in Pool B with South Korea, the Netherlands and Taiwan. If Israel reaches that round, team officials should be able to add several Jewish major leaguers to the roster.
“You have 28 guys who are really proud to be Jewish, raising awareness for Israel baseball and Jewish people,” said Josh Zeid, who struck out six batters in three and two-thirds innings of relief. “You guys saw the crowd today. If we win, it will build support for baseball in Israel.”
Seven players on the Israeli roster are returning from the team that fell just short of qualifying for the 2013 W.B.C. when Zeid gave up the winning runs during a 9-7, 10-inning loss to Spain in the final of that play-in tournament.
The players said memories of that 2012 qualifier were not yet fully erased.
“I remember it not tasting good the last four years,” said Decker, who was part of that Israeli roster in 2012. “That wound never heals for us. Every time we saw each other, we’d bring it up. Ask us that question at the end of the tournament.”
Israel’s players gathered for a three-day minicamp last week in Wappingers Falls, N.Y., and bonded quickly.
“A lot of us know each other, so there’s chemistry already,” Decker said. “I never played on a team with more than three Jews since Little League in Santa Monica.”
Davis found himself greeted enthusiastically by fans in New York who said they missed him.
“People still embrace me here,” said Davis, who slugged 32 homers for the Mets in 2012. “I don’t know why that’s true, but I appreciate it.”
Another former Met, Josh Satin, also was surprised to discover that he had fans.
“When I was playing for the Mets, it was Ike and I — we were the Jews in New York,” Satin said. “I was just a two-year utility player, but I felt like the city gravitated toward me. A kid would come up to say hello, and I’d say: ‘How do you recognize me? I play once a month.’”
In the opening game of the qualifiers earlier Thursday, Pakistan, a team composed of native-born players with no major or minor league experience, fell hard to Brazil, 10-0. Manager Syed Fakhar Shah said his team had obtained great experience from the loss, and he promised better things on Friday in the second round.
The Pakistanis made base-running errors, Shah said, because they did not know how hard the Brazilians could throw. They also did not know they could dive so easily for balls on the soft, artificial infield surface. The manager lamented that Pakistan’s best starting pitcher, Muhammad Usman, could not obtain a visa on time.
“If he was here, the result would be different,” Shah said. “And if we had two or three weeks, we could cover many things and the result would be different.”