Sorry, Wrong Jonathan Martin - The New York Times
WASHINGTON — I was confused when I started receiving tweets directed at Miami Dolphins lineman Jonathan Martin.
Besides the fact that I played guard and Martin is a tackle, I was also perplexed because, well, he is a 6-foot-5 312-pound professional football player, and I am a political reporter for The New York Times, who barely cracked 200 pounds at the height of my high school glory days.
Then there is the fact that I have “NYT” in my Twitter handle (@jmartnyt), and my history nerd avatar is a picture of Lyndon B. Johnson’s two beagles, Her and Him, perched on the south lawn of the White House.
All this had done little to stop a flood of Twitter messages aimed my way in the weeks since news broke that the other Jonathan Martin had left his team.
As reports of the treatment of Martin by a fellow lineman, the more improbably named Richie Incognito, became the biggest story in sports, my “@” mentions on Twitter began including about an equal mix of hang-in-there notes of encouragement and pointed inquires about the robustness of my manhood.
Since the Dolphins were defeated by Tampa Bay, 22-19, on Monday night, though, there has been less good will — and their fans have become even more pointed.
“U got a beagle dog as ur profile pic n ur in the nfl,” wrote @calli_631, who also used a vulgarity to accuse me of ruining the Dolphins’ season. Somebody named RunRickyRun (handle: @LordGexs) was a bit more delicate about my namesake’s absence from Miami’s offensive line. “The Dolphins need ya back ASAP!!!!! @jmartnyt @68INCOGNITO.”
Apparently, when you type “Jonathan Martin” into the Twitter search form, my account comes up with that of my Dolphins doppelgänger.
At first, I found the confusion quite amusing. So did my family. My wife, Betsy, is also a journalist and has been tickled about not only the continuing Twitter mix-up but has also gotten a kick out of how my byline was now in some unlikely headlines (“In the case of Jonathan Martin, remember that even big guys cry”).
Instead of correcting people on Twitter, I have been reposting some of the more egregious but PG-rated misdirected messages. (There have been plenty of obscene ones, too.)
And I have been fascinated watching the Twitter ecosystem work when people like @kyle_pacheco — who urged me, with an expletive mixed in, to handle my business like a grown man not a 5 year old — were upbraided by others on the microblogging site for having the wrong guy.
As the story has intensified and misplaced 140-character assaults have piled up, though, the misunderstanding has lost some of its charm. I feel bad for my fellow Jonathan Martin — lord knows what his Twitter feed looks like — but the whole affair has also been a reminder about how ugly discourse can be on the Internet. During campaign season, nasty, even abusive, emails and Twitter messages are standard fare for political reporters. Partisans (or, in this case, fans) say things online they would never contemplate saying to the face of a stranger, let alone one the size of the brawny Jonathan Martin. As one person said in a message to me this week, it is “keyboard courage.”
But I do not want to turn this into some tut-tutting riff on our ever-coarsening society. As an avid sports fan, I found it pretty neat to receive a shout-out from Deadspin and to wake up Tuesday morning to find an email request to call into WFAN’s “Boomer and Carton” morning show. (I did resist the temptation to drop in a “longtime listener, first-time caller,” when I went on the air.)
Before I became entranced by history and politics, my first passion was sports: playing backyard whiffle ball and sandlot football with my brother, Jeremy, and our friends; reading about games in the Sports section and poring over Sports Illustrated when it came in the mail each Thursday; and collecting cards and autographs from the players I admired. I still have close friendships with some of my high school football teammates. The bullying we received as underclassmen was mild — just the occasional dead fish left in our shoulder pads. I was not going to come close to the N.F.L. — I rode the bench for a single year of Division III college ball — but even as my career plateaued, my love for the game has continued to grow. Just ask my wife, who will see (endure?) her fifth football game of the fall this weekend.
All of this is to say that by my lights, there are worse people to share a name with than a Stanford-educated former all-American who was taken in the second round of the N.F.L. draft. I was reminded of this Tuesday when I received a message from Gerry Sandusky, a Baltimore sportscaster who is not related to Jerry Sandusky, the former Penn State assistant who was convicted of sexually abusing boys.
“I have walked where fate has now taken you,” wrote @GerrySandusky, who surely had it harder than me.
What I have not done yet is send a Twitter message to the other Jonathan Martin. So, Big Jonathan, you have my best wishes. This, too, shall pass. You will surely be representing our name again on the field soon.
And to those of you who want to get in touch with Big Jonathan: he is @J_Martin71.