For the Atlanta Braves, a Housewarming Present for the Future - The New York Times
KISSIMMEE, Fla. — From their golf cart last week, in a plaza beyond center field at the Atlanta Braves’ spring training complex, John Hart and John Coppolella could watch two minor league exhibition games at once. To one side was a left-handed pitching prospect named Sean Newcomb. To the other, a promising right-hander named Touki Toussaint.
“You go back to the 2014 draft,” said Coppolella, the Braves’ general manager. “Pick 15? Sean Newcomb. Pick 16? Touki Toussaint. And they were both here on these fields, and they are two of probably 12 to 15 guys we feel have front-line starter type of upside.”
If the Braves truly have that many future aces roaming the back fields this spring, they might eclipse their extraordinary streak of consecutive division titles from 1991 through 2005. But since most are not ready, they added three veterans for this season: Bartolo Colon, R. A. Dickey and Jaime Garcia.
Those additions, and others to the lineup, have the Braves brimming with optimism — an unlikely feeling for a team that awoke last Aug. 30 with a 48-83 record. But the Braves rallied to win 20 of their final 30 games, and as they prepare to christen a new home, SunTrust Park, with an exhibition game against the Yankees on Friday, they are talking boldly of their immediate future.
“I think we really have a chance to compete and be in the playoffs this year,” first baseman Freddie Freeman said. “Our lineup is balanced and it’s deep. We have depth in our rotation now, which we haven’t had; we have three-fifths of the rotation with new guys. I really like our chances this year.”
Freeman’s enthusiasm is understandable. Freeman and starter Julio Teheran, who is scheduled to face the Mets on opening day at Citi Field on Monday, are the franchise cornerstones, the foundation pieces the Braves kept even as they tore down the team after a losing season in 2014. The Braves had reached the playoffs in three of the previous four seasons, but they were saddled with bad contracts and a thin base of prospects.
Jason Heyward, Craig Kimbrel, Andrelton Simmons, Justin and B. J. Upton and others were sent away before Hart, the president of baseball operations, and Coppolella pulled off a coup at the winter meetings in December 2015. They traded pitcher Shelby Miller, who had been acquired for Heyward a year earlier, to Arizona for shortstop Dansby Swanson, center fielder Ender Inciarte and pitcher Aaron Blair.
That trade, in which the Braves smartly exploited a rival’s desperation, brought two dynamic young pieces to their lineup in exchange for a pitcher who was headed for a fall. More everyday players have arrived since: outfielder Matt Kemp, second baseman Brandon Phillips and catcher Kurt Suzuki. Expectations have grown quickly.
“It’s nice to actually bring people in,” Freeman said. “When we brought Matt in last year in August, it was the first time that I felt we were actually moving toward the end of the tunnel instead of letting people go. We were in a rebuild; I’m not saying we are anymore.”
While that has Freeman thinking playoffs this year, he said he was also encouraged by the farm system, which Baseball America ranked first in the majors this season, after placing it 29th of 30 teams in 2015. Its rejuvenation is a major source of pride for the front office.
“We feel like we’re way ahead of schedule,” Coppolella said, listing the long slogs that other rebuilding teams have endured. “We are two years into this process, and the strides that we’ve made are unbelievable.”
Until the Braves win a World Series title, Coppolella acknowledged, they will be a work in progress. As if to underscore the point, Hart quickly rejected any comparison to the 1994 Cleveland Indians, who moved into a new ballpark after an 86-loss season and began a long run of success.
Hart, the architect of that team, said the Indians were virtually a finished product by opening day that year. These Braves are not.
“I don’t think it’s even close,” Hart said. “We were ready in ’94. We were ready to win. I mean, we had grown the club for five years.”
Hart cited several high-impact veterans he had imported for those Indians, and a litany of stars who had already begun to establish themselves, like Kenny Lofton, Albert Belle, Jim Thome and Manny Ramirez.
“We’re not there yet,” he said. “Our young players aren’t here yet. You look up and, yeah, it’s nice to have Dansby, it’s nice to have Ender, they’re young people that fit. Freddie’s been here, he’s the one we didn’t trade. We’ve got two veterans in the corners, we’ve got a veteran at second base, and we’ve got an older veteran player in Adonis Garcia at third. We’ve got veteran catchers. So we’re probably a little bit more of a veteran team.”
Hart added: “Because we’re opening a new park and because the club has some talent and played well and it’s a great group of guys — that’s why we added three one-year starters. That’s the only reason. Not for any other reason, not like, ‘Hey, we’re ready to win, we’re gonna knock it out of the park.’ It’s going to be a different way to blend our young players in in Atlanta. They’re not all going to come at once.”
None of the newcomers is a sure thing. Can Colon, 43, and Dickey, 42, still provide quality innings? Can the fragile Jaime Garcia stay healthy? Can Kemp and Phillips, who grew unhappy in previous stops, stay upbeat and productive? Will the Braves be helped or hurt by the new ballpark, where the right-center field power alley will be 15 feet closer to the plate than it was at Turner Field?
The Braves do know that Inciarte should still be able to scale the wall in center, which measures 8 feet 8 inches tall. He did it in New York last September, stealing a potential game-winning homer from Yoenis Cespedes on his way to his first Gold Glove. Inciarte called it the top catch of his career, since the Mets were fighting for a playoff spot.
“I’ll say that’s the best moment,” said Inciarte, who signed a five-year, $30.53 million contract extension in December. “I’ve probably made other catches that I like, too, but Citi Field had a really good atmosphere. I love playing there and I know the guys enjoy playing there, too. We’re looking forward to opening day already.”
The Braves hope that day will be the first of a special season that begins a revival of their winning tradition. For now, though, they are parked in the middle, certain of their direction and eager to get moving.