Nine Florida Football Players Face Fraud Charges - The New York Times
The standout receiver Antonio Callaway and running back Jordan Scarlett were among nine Florida players facing felony fraud charges on Monday on accusations that they transferred money from a stolen credit card to their campus bookstore accounts and used it to buy electronics.
Asked whether the potential charges would affect the players’ status with the team, Coach Jim McElwain said, “You’re darn right.” All of the players were suspended from the team but remained enrolled at the university.
Defensive lineman Jordan Smith was facing five charges, and offensive lineman Kadeem Telfort was facing 30, according to university police reports.
Callaway, Scarlett and five other players — defensive lineman Keivonnis Davis, defensive lineman Richerd Desir-Jones, linebacker James Houston, linebacker Ventrell Miller and receiver Rick Wells — made one charge each with the stolen card number, ranging in value from $500 to $2,000, the authorities said.
Arizona’s Carson Palmer completed 29 of 48 passes for 325 yards, and the host Cardinals outgained the Cowboys, 332 yards to 273, but Dak Prescott and Dallas used an efficient ground game to grind out a 28-17 victory.
Dallas’s Ezekiel Elliott scored on an 8-yard run with less than five minutes remaining for his first touchdown of the season. Palmer became the fourth N.F.L. quarterback to throw 100 touchdown passes for more than one team. (NYT)
EAGLES LOSE SPROLES TO DOUBLE INJURY Eagles running back Darren Sproles tore his anterior cruciate ligament and broke his wrist on the same play in Philadelphia’s victory over the Giants on Sunday and will miss the remainder of the season.
Coach Doug Pederson confirmed the injuries Monday, saying it was a “devastating” loss. Sproles, 34, has nine returns for touchdowns, including seven on punts.
Michael Taylor homered, A. J. Cole (3-5) allowed one run while pitching into the sixth inning, and the Washington Nationals beat the Phillies, 3-1, in Philadelphia. Washington, the National League East champion, extended its franchise record with a 50th road win.
Flulike symptoms prevented the five-time All-Star Bryce Harper, out since Aug. 12 with a hyperextended knee, from making his anticipated return to the Nationals’ lineup.
AROUND THE MAJORS Josh Donaldson homered and drove in three runs, powering the visiting Toronto Blue Jays past the American League East-leading Red Sox, 6-4, and ending Boston’s six-game winning streak. James Shields pitched seven strong innings, Nicky Delmonico drove in two runs, and the Chicago White Sox beat the visiting Angels, 4-2, dealing a serious blow to Los Angeles’s slim playoff hopes. Addison Russell hit a three-run double in the first inning, and the visiting Chicago Cubs beat the St. Louis Cardinals, 10-2, moving within a win of cinching a second straight N.L. Central title.
Alexandre Lacazette scored both goals as host Arsenal defeated West Bromwich Albion, 2-0, in the Premier League, prolonging a September comeback.
Arsenal lost two of its first three matches but collected 7 of a possible 9 points this month on top of victories in the Europa League and the League Cup.
West Brom midfielder Gareth Barry, 36, made a record 633rd Premier League appearance in the game, passing the mark set by the former Manchester United winger Ryan Giggs.
JUVENTUS PRESIDENT GETS ONE-YEAR BAN Juventus’s president, Andrea Agnelli, was barred for one year by the Italian soccer federation for his role in selling tickets to hard-core “ultra” fans who encouraged scalping. The court also fined Juventus 300,000 euros ($350,000). The team said it would appeal.
Agnelli was accused of authorizing the sale of season passes and other tickets and has acknowledged meeting with Rocco Dominello, an “ultra” fan linked to the Calabrian ‘Ndrangheta crime mob who has since been sentenced to nearly eight years in prison for scalping.
But Agnelli said the meetings had occurred only with large numbers of other fans at celebratory occasions and that the club had never intended to engage in illegal activity.
REAL BETIS TOPS LEVANTE Real Betis kept the momentum going after its stunning win at Real Madrid by thrashing Levante, 4-0, and moving closer to the top of the Spanish league. Forward Antonio Sanabria netted a goal in each half to lead Real Betis to its third straight victory. The club moved up to fifth place, one spot ahead of Madrid. It trails the leader, Barcelona, by 6 points.
VILLAREAL FIRES ITS COACH VILLARREAL fired Coach Fran Escribá after the team’s poor start in the Spanish league and replaced him with the B team coach Javi Calleja. The moves came a day after a 4-0 loss at Getafe, Villarreal’s third defeat in six league games. Villarreal was 14th in the 20-team standings.
Thunder guard Russell Westbrook, who has yet to sign a contract extension, said that Oklahoma City was where he wanted to be and that he was “happy” about the off-season additions of Carmelo Anthony, who formally completed his move to the team on Monday, and Paul George.
Westbrook said he had not signed, a situation that has tempered some of the excitement around the team, because of the birth of his son and a busy travel schedule. He has until Oct. 16 to sign a contract that would be worth more than $200 million.
CAVS EXPECT THOMAS BACK BY JANUARY The Cleveland Cavaliers said Isaiah Thomas could be running the point by January. Thomas, the All-Star point guard acquired from Boston over the summer in a blockbuster trade for Kyrie Irving, has made progress with his hip injury, the team said.
JAMES SAYS HIS PLANS HAVEN’T CHANGED LeBron James said that his intentions to finish his career with Cleveland had not changed and that he would not make a decision about his future until next summer. James, 32, has a player’s option for next season worth $35.6 million.
Sloane Stephens, the United States Open champion, and Madison Keys, the runner-up, were knocked out in the first round of the Wuhan Open in China.
In their first matches since the final at Flushing Meadows, the 17th-ranked Stephens lost to Wang Qiang of China, 6-2, 6-2, while the 12th-ranked Keys was beaten by her fellow American Varvara Lepchenko, 6-2, 7-6 (4).
Thomas Greiss stopped all 25 shots in the Islanders’ 3-0 victory over a visiting Devils split-squad team. Brock Nelson and Mathew Barzal scored first-period goals for the Islanders, and Johnny Boychuk added an empty-netter.
Keith Kinkaid played the entire game in goal for the Devils and made 42 saves.
In Summerside, Prince Edward Island, the remaining Devils defeated the Ottawa Senators, 8-1, in the Hockeyville Canada game. Pavel Zacha scored two power-play goals in the first period. Cory Schneider had 12 saves for the Devils.
RANGERS WIN IN OVERTIME Ryan McDonagh’s goal at 3 minutes 51 seconds of overtime lifted the Rangers to a 3-2 victory over the visiting Philadelphia Flyers. Henrik Lundqvist made 37 saves for the Rangers, who got goals from Rick Nash and Mika Zibanejad.