Italy’s Ninth-Inning Rally Stuns Mexico at World Baseball Classic - The New York Times
John Andreoli capped Italy’s five-run rally in the bottom of the ninth inning with a two-run single, lifting his team to a 10-9 victory over host Mexico on Thursday night in Guadalajara in the first game in Pool D at the World Baseball Classic.
Francisco Cervelli sparked Italy’s big inning with a leadoff double against Roberto Osuna. Chris Colabello followed with a double, advancing pinch-runner Sebastian Poma to third. Alex Liddi then hit a two-run double to make it 9-7. Drew Butera reached on an error, and Drew Maggi walked to load the bases.
Oliver Perez came in for Mexico and allowed a run-scoring single to Brandon Nimmo to make it 9-8 before Andreoli’s clutch hit.
“For some reason, anytime Italy wins, it’s a big surprise,” the Italian manager, Marco Mazzieri, said. “It’s been like that for eight years now. The only ones that are not surprised, it’s these guys, because they’re playing to win. They’re playing to win every pitch.
“And sometimes, we’re able to make it; sometimes, we don’t make it. But they play to win, and they showed it tonight.”
Italy leads Pool D. Venezuela and Puerto Rico were scheduled to play late Friday night.
“We play until the last out — it’s something we talked about from long before the tournament started,” Colabello said. “One of the things we have to do is we have to grind. We might not be as talented as other teams, but I think it’s really important that we play every pitch, we play every inning, we play every out. And I think no matter what the scoreboard says, it’s our responsibility to go out every day and give our best at-bats.”
Mexico will try to get its first win of the tournament on Saturday against Puerto Rico.
“Next game is going to be like a Game 7 of the World Series,” Mexico Manager Edgar Gonzalez said. “We cannot change the outcome, but we’re going to try to stay positive. The next game is the most important game for us, and I know that this team is not going to bow down.”
CUBA AND JAPAN ADVANCE Outfielder Alfredo Despaigne hit a grand slam during the fifth inning in Tokyo on Friday, and Cuba defeated Australia, 4-3, in Pool B, to advance to the W.B.C.’s second round.
Despaigne, who played for the Chiba Lotte Marines in Japan the past three seasons, connected off pitcher Lachlan Wells for his second home run of the tournament.
“I don’t swing to be a home-run king,” Despaigne said. “I try to drive in runs. I’m so happy to contribute to the national team.”
Despaigne homered three times in six games at the W.B.C. in 2013. His grand slam Friday came off a 2-1 fastball that Wells left in the middle of the plate.
Cuba finished Pool B play with a 2-1 record and will face Israel at Tokyo Dome on Sunday. Australia has played in all four W.B.C. tournaments but has never made it out of the first round.
“We outhit them, we outplayed them,” Australia Manager Jon Deeble said. “The only place we didn’t win was the scoreboard. They have a knack of doing that.”
Also, Seiji Kobayashi and Sho Nakata hit two-run homers as Japan routed China, 7-1, in Tokyo to finish Pool B play at 3-0.
Japan, a two-time W.B.C. champion, will open the second round against the Netherlands on Sunday.