Richard Jefferson’s 15-Year N.B.A. Title Search Boasts a Vaunted Crew - The New York Times
OAKLAND, Calif. — From Jason Kidd to LeBron James, Richard Jefferson wants the world to know how blessed he is to be back in the N.B.A. finals 13 years after almost believing that landing on professional basketball’s grand stage might be an annual occurrence, just like his birthday.
He first appeared as a flashy, fast-breaking Nets rookie small forward in 2002, swept by the Shaq-and-Kobe Los Angeles Lakers when the Nets played in New Jersey. He returned a year later, an established starter, as the Nets succumbed to the San Antonio Spurs.
“First of all, most people don’t have 13-year careers, so for me to play 15 years, and then to come here in Year 15 and be a contributor again, I take it as a humbling thing,” he said.
To elaborate, Jefferson added: “Trust me, after we won the Eastern Conference, Bron caught me just staring off into space, taking it in. But even with all his success, all his finals, he totally got it.”
The basketball universe obsesses about the championship rings owned or not owned by the sport’s 1 percent, but every June there is a lower-bracket guy or two for whom who we could wish for one more.
Affectionately known in N.B.A. circles as R. J., Jefferson had no media horde around him Friday at Oracle Arena as James and his Cleveland Cavaliers tried to explain how they were mangled in Game 1, primarily by the Golden State Warriors’ B team.
There was no podium for the 35-year-old Jefferson, who sat in the lower stands and agreed that from Kidd to King James, he might have as formidable an all-teammate squad as anyone in the history of the league.
Kidd was the pure facilitator for those two Nets finalists. In 2009, Jefferson joined Tim Duncan in San Antonio for two and a half seasons. In March 2012, Jefferson was traded to the Warriors, where he watched Stephen Curry heal from early-career ankle injuries and begin to turn 3-point shooting into a video game featuring a man of flesh and blood.
Last season was spent in Dallas with Dirk Nowitzki, and Jefferson surprisingly crashed Cleveland’s rotation after signing as a free agent in August, averaging 5.5 points and just under 18 minutes a game.
How might his all-career team fare in various mythical matchups?
Pretty darn well, Jefferson said, before adding: “We’ll make Tim the center even though he doesn’t like to be called one. Dirk’s got to play power forward.”
Jefferson has a 1-year-old son, and the new father’s bedtime stories will have serious name-dropping, educating the boy he calls Little Richard on his father’s long, winding and plenty lucrative career (he’s earned more than $100 million).
“I’ll tell you this, J-Kidd was the most fun to play with,” Jefferson said. “Dirk was probably the funniest of them. LeBron is the most social of them. He wants everybody to go to dinner every night, wants to hang out, a team camaraderie guy. Tim and J-Kidd were kind of introverted, just played the game.”
And Curry? Jefferson shook his head when asked if in his season-plus with the Warriors he could have imagined that Curry would become the leading man on the N.B.A. marquee.
“Oh, nobody could see this,” he said. “But could I see that he had the ability to be one of the great shooters? Without a doubt, but then you had developing players around him, helping him flourish. Every M.V.P. has guys that complement them, or protect them, allow them to do what they do.”
He was, in part, vouching for his own longevity, from quasi star to longtime starter to aging role player, or what he called “a high-level professional that really good teams would want around.”
Who knows? Maybe one reason the Cavaliers wanted Jefferson was for his familiarity with the Warriors.
The Golden State team he joined in March 2012 was, he said, “kind of a ragtag team.” Mark Jackson was the new coach in that lockout-shortened, 66-game season. An injured Curry played in 26 of them. Klay Thompson was a rookie. The Warriors went 23-43.
The next season brought Harrison Barnes and Draymond Green through the draft, Andrew Bogut in a trade and solid veterans like Carl Landry and Jarrett Jack. Jefferson was a bit player, but the Warriors won 47 games and a playoff round.
“When they drafted Harrison and they drafted Draymond, you got young, hungry talent from successful places — North Carolina and Michigan State — with a mentality that we got to win,” Jefferson said. “Same as when I came to New Jersey and J-Kidd had the attitude, like, we don’t care what happened here before we got here.”
Jefferson also recalled that someone else coached the rising Warriors before Steve Kerr, and his view of Jackson is positive.
“He put more confidence in these guys than any coach I’ve seen put in a group of guys,” he said.
But Jackson was fired after winning 51 games in 2013-14, and liftoff to and over the moon came with Kerr at the helm and Curry as the game’s most jaw-dropping long-range-shooting star.
“Let’s just say his shot selection has expanded every year and he started to push the envelope,” Jefferson said. “O.K., I can make it from two feet behind the line pretty consistently. Let’s try three feet. Damn, that went in, too. So you just keep pushing the limit to see where that limit is.”
Playing with James has made Jefferson stretch his own limits and feel younger, but he said he would consider retirement if he could just have a ring.
His Arizona team — with Luke Walton, the Kerr assistant recently named coach of the Lakers — lost to Duke in the 2001 N.C.A.A. final. Jefferson was on the 2004 United States Olympic team that won a bronze. The Nets were overmatched in their two N.B.A. finals.
“I haven’t had the honor to finish on top,” he said. “That’s all I really want to do. That’s why I came to Cleveland.”
He has played alongside five of the great ones, but it looked in Game 1 as if James could use a Duncan or a Kidd against Curry’s crowd. We shall see. In the meantime, all Jefferson knows is he’s almost out of time.
His final thought: “I can say with certainty that I don’t have another 13-year gap to get here again.”