New Zealand Ousts Britain at America’s Cup After Capsizing - The New York Times
Emirates Team New Zealand rebounded from a heart-stopping capsize two days earlier on Bermuda’s Great Sound to clinch a spot in the America’s Cup challenger finals on Thursday.
Britain, meanwhile, still has not bounced back from its loss in 1851 to the schooner America.
New Zealand took two of three races against Land Rover BAR to win the series, 5-2, and advance to face the winner of the series between Sweden’s Artemis Racing and SoftBank Team Japan. The Swedes won three races Thursday to move one win away from advancing.
The New Zealand team capsized during a race on Tuesday, seriously damaging the 50-foot foiling catamaran. The team said it would have been ready Wednesday, but got a break when high winds postponed racing until Thursday.
It was a fortuitous break for New Zealand, which denied the British sailing star Sir Ben Ainslie a chance to lead his country to the Auld Mug. The British have been trying for 166 years to win back the trophy they lost in a race around the Isle of Wight in 1851.
The winner of the challenger finals, which start Saturday, will face Oracle Team USA in the 35th America’s Cup match starting June 17.
New Orleans defensive tackle Nick Fairley has seen multiple heart specialists, including one who advised him to stop playing football, Saints Coach Sean Payton said.
Payton said he hoped Fairley, who has played his entire six-year N.F.L. career with an enlarged heart, can return to the Saints. But Payton said that Fairley, 29, should be certain that playing would not worsen his heart condition.
Fairley, a 2011 first-round draft choice by Detroit out of Auburn, was one of New Orleans’ top defensive performers last season. He was credited with six and a half sacks and nine tackles for a loss in 2016, and he signed a four-year contract extension worth up to $28 million this off-season.
Chris Iannetta drove in a career-high seven runs with a home run and two doubles, and the Arizona Diamondbacks routed the visiting San Diego Padres, 15-3, to finish a three-game sweep.
Iannetta hit a go-ahead, two-run homer off Clayton Richard for a 4-3 lead in the fifth, a three-run double against Kevin Quackenbush in the sixth and a two-run double off Brandon Maurer in the eighth. Six of Iannetta’s eight home runs this season have tied the score or put Arizona ahead.
Arizona won its ninth straight at Chase Field and improved its home record to 24-8, the best in the majors. The Diamondbacks outscored the Padres by 32-9 in the sweep, which extended San Diego’s losing streak to five.
 REDS SWEEP CARDINALS Joey Votto had a two-run homer among his four hits, Adam Duvall had three hits and the Reds beat the visiting St. Louis Cardinals, 5-2, to complete a four-game sweep.
The Reds had not swept the Cardinals in four games since 2003 in Cincinnati. St. Louis has lost seven in a row over all for the first time since 2013.
ANGELS ROUT TIGERS Albert Pujols hit a tiebreaking sacrifice fly in a four-run fifth inning and the Los Angeles Angels added six in the seventh to beat the Tigers, 11-4, in Detroit.
Danny Espinosa had three hits and three R.B.I. and Andrelton Simmons had three hits and two R.B.I. for the Angels, who got two runs batted in by C. J. Cron.
MORE ABUSE ALLEGATIONS Major League Baseball said it was looking into a domestic violence accusation against Chicago Cubs shortstop Addison Russell a day after it emerged that the league was looking into a similar claim against Tampa Bay Rays catcher Derek Norris.
Russell’s wife, Melisa, posted a photo on Instagram on Wednesday with a caption suggesting he had been unfaithful to her. In another post, a user described by Melisa Russell as a close friend accused Addison Russell of “mentally and physically abusing her.” The posts were deleted.
In a statement Thursday, Russell said, “Any allegation I have abused my wife is false and hurtful.” On Wednesday, Norris denied an allegation by his ex-fiancée that he had been emotionally and physically abusive toward her. Norris also said he would assist the league in its investigation.
Russell, an All-Star last season, is batting .209 with three homers and 19 R.B.I. He was not in the lineup for the Cubs’ 4-1 loss to the visiting Colorado Rockies. Norris homered in consecutive innings as the host Rays beat the Chicago White Sox, 7-5.
Saudi Arabia declined to take part in a minute of silence for the victims of the London attack during a World Cup qualifying match against host Australia in Adelaide.
The Australian starters lined up at the center circle with their arms on their teammates’ shoulders while the Saudi team continued its preparations. Two Australians were among the eight people killed in the attack.
The Australian soccer federation, known as F.F.A., said afterward that Saudi team officials had advised them the “tradition was not in keeping with Saudi culture.”
In a statement, the Saudi federation said it “deeply regrets and unreservedly apologizes for any offense caused.”
The statement added, “The Saudi Arabian Football Federation condemns all acts of terrorism and extremism and extends its sincerest condolences to the families of all the victims.”
Australia won the match, 3-2, to move into a tie with Japan and Saudi Arabia atop the Asia Group B standings.
AMERICAN WOMEN TOP SWEDEN Rose Lavelle scored in the 56th minute to lead the United States women to a 1-0 victory over host Sweden in an exhibition match in Gothenburg.
Lavelle, 22, scored off a pass from Crystal Dunn for her second international goal in her fifth appearance. American goalkeeper Alyssa Naeher got the shutout with the help of midfielder Allie Long, who swept the ball off the goal line after a shot bounced over Naeher.
The United States will play Norway on Sunday.