N.L.R.B. Lawyer Sees Some College Football Players as Employees, With Rights - The New York Times
Top-level college football players at private universities are employees entitled to request improved working conditions and even to seek pay for their efforts, according to a memorandum issued by the general counsel for the National Labor Relations Board and made public on Tuesday.
The determination, which was included in a letter from the counsel, Robert F. Griffin, and addressed to regional board directors nationwide, found that scholarship football players at private colleges like Northwestern, Stanford and Notre Dame have employment rights and are protected by law should they seek to bargain for a safer work environment, or request pay.
The memo was revealed more than a year and a half after the N.L.R.B. in Washington declined to exert jurisdiction over the Northwestern football team’s union petition, which effectively denied players the right to unionize and collectively bargain. Griffin’s memo does not affect that ruling. It does not give players at private universities the right to collectively bargain, nor does it carry the force of law like a full board finding, muting its impact. Supporters of athletes’ rights called it a clear signal that the question of whether college football players are employees remains unsettled.
“This is an important legal victory for college athletes,” said John Adam, a lawyer who represented the Northwestern players. “They are employees and have the rights and protections of federal law. That’s never happened.”
Last fall, Northwestern faced  an unfair labor practice charge after a California lawyer contended the football team’s rule book encroached on players’ rights. Northwestern resolved the dispute by removing restrictions on players’ use of social media and their statements to the news media. One potential outcome of Tuesday’s memo, Adam said, was that other private schools would be vulnerable to similar charges and might have to amend their team rules.
Donald Remy, the N.C.A.A.’s chief legal officer, said: “The general counsel’s memo and personal opinion do not reflect a binding position of the N.L.R.B. As we have stated before and he was obligated to acknowledge, the N.L.R.B. previously decided that it would not exercise jurisdiction regarding the employment context of student-athletes and their schools. The general counsel’s memo does not change that decision and does not allow student-athletes to unionize.”
Any legal machinations, however, could soon be moot. The term of Griffin, who was appointed by President Barack Obama, ends in November, and President Trump will appoint the N.L.R.B.’s next general counsel. The five-member board will also flip from a Democratic majority to Republican under the new administration, and the remade body is expected to be less sympathetic to organized labor.
Wilma B. Liebman, a former chairwoman of the N.L.R.B., said a new board could seek to clarify the employment status of college football players through a ruling on a case involving graduate teaching assistants.
“A new board has the potential to look at this issue very differently,” she said. “And that would limit any long-term implications.”