Yankee Hatred Is Losing Its Point  - The New York Times
It’s not clear whom my father hated more, the Yankees or Judge Judy. There’s no question whom he hated longer.
Some of my earliest memories involve sitting around a big Sylvania black-and-white television set and watching him mutter, “Yankee luck,” in between the Ballantine Beer ads as they piled up championship after championship in the 1950s and ‘60s. Over the years the objects of his scorn shifted from the epochal Mantle/Ford/Berra era to the louts and loudmouths of the Steinbrenner/Martin/Jackson Imperium to the infuriating perfection of Mariano Rivera (“the Devil,” my father hissed as Rivera strode triumphantly off the mound) and the Rivera/Jeter/A-Rod regime now coming to a close.
My father passed on to that great dugout in the sky just in time to miss what feels like this black hole of Yankee decline, a combination of injuries, age and ineptitude that has caused the Yankees to miss the playoffs for two years in a row for the first time since the early 1990s and left them facing the future with a decrepit core of players.
His sons have done their best to carry on for him. But after this Wagnerian week in the Bronx, my father would have seen two somewhat contradictory lessons. Betting against the Yankees, even with rust and decay seeping into their bones, is still like betting against the house. And Yankee hating is not what it used to be.
Not that there isn’t plenty still to hate. Where to start? John Sterling’s shrill victory calls (“Ballgame over! Yankees win! Thuuuuuuhhhhhh Yankees win!“)? The bloated payroll that makes rooting for the Yankees like rooting for the Koch brothers? The radio broadcasts with a commercial between every pitch? The now-annual hagiographic victory laps for retiring Yankees stars? It’s the same big-money bombast that has always made the Yankees both loved and loathed, only, like everything else in our amped-up age, bigger and louder than ever. As the WFAN radio host Steve Somers told me: “I always say about the Yankees, ‘Our tradition, your checkbook.’ Everything’s for sale, even those $409 used Jeter socks.”
But, mostly, you think: really? The second-biggest payroll in baseball gets you a team that is scraping the bottom of the American League in runs scored with no Plan B other than to find some more old and expensive stars to buy. It all seems like a validation of the great April 2013 New Yorker cover showing Derek Jeter, Alex Rodriguez, Ichiro Suzuki et al. using crutches, canes, walkers and wheelchairs. This is what the mighty Yankees have come to?
After all, it was only because of the expanded wild-card system — like elementary school, where everyone gets an award — that the season dragged on, the march of the undead, allowing the Yankees to remain marginally alive until the season’s last week as the teams ahead of them stumbled to the finish line.
Even Jeter’s night for the ages Thursday had a note of momentary triumphalism along with the heroics. Amazing career, classy guy, one of the most compelling moments of sports theater ever. You can be a Yankee hater and a Jeter fan. But the night’s biggest achievement was to make the whole lousy season temporarily disappear as if all were still wonderful in the Bronx.
Still, if there’s much gloating out there (outside Boston, which, of course, has its own issues — the Yanks and the Red Sox these days are like feuding doddering uncles), it’s hard to find it.
In truth, Yankee hatred peaked in the early 1960s, when baseball was still undeniably America’s favorite sport. But these days, people, especially young ones, are far more invested in football and basketball, real and fantasy. On Facebook, there are more popular hate pages for the Cowboys, the Steelers, Manchester United and LeBron James. On normally cranky Twitter, it’s a Yankees love fest.
Given their history, the Yankees will probably find a way to acquire Clayton Kershaw, Mike Trout and Miguel Cabrera over the winter, but, in the cast of current characters likely to be around next year, it’s hard to find a Yankee eminent enough to hate. Brett Gardner? Jacoby Ellsbury? At least there’s A-Rod, if he returns.
Yes, there have been extended dark ages for the Yankees, from 1965 to 1975, and 1982 to 1993. But Yankee haters have become accustomed to expecting the worst, meaning success every season. So, not surprisingly, a trip to the Bronx to take in last Sunday’s game against the ever-accommodating Toronto Blue Jays proved to be a mixed experience.
A search for dissenting voices turned up not a loyal opposition with some kind of edge, but only very nice Blue Jays fans like Eric Comte of Alberta and J. J. Powell of Toronto. They didn’t get the Yankee Hatred concept. “When you’re always on top, people are going to dislike you, right?” Powell, decked out in a Colby Rasmus jersey, said sympathetically. “I don’t have a problem with them. Baseball’s a gentleman’s game. I respect what they’ve done.” It may be a Canada thing.
To be honest, the Yankees haven’t exactly been Ruthian for a while. If you really want a vibrant dynasty, you should go to a Cardinals game. But at a time when the rich tend to stay rich and the poor tend to stay poor, no one at the Stadium seemed too worried about the Yankees’ swoon-let extending very far.
Not Blue Jays like Kevin Pillar, a young reserve outfielder, who said: “It’s the show of the show; the Yankees set the bar even in a down year. The ownership is too good, they have too much money, and they’re going to go out and get the players they need. They always do.”
Not Sterling, who briefly pondered the thought of a long-term decline, sounding as if it were akin to announcing the games in Urdu. He said he’d believe it when he saw it. “I would say the Yankees are still the most-loved and most-hated team in sports,” he said. “I understand what you’re saying. If they become losers, will anyone hate them? But we’re a long way from that.”
Not relative Yankee newcomers like Brian McCann and Chase Headley, who seemed to think, down year or not, that they’d died and gone to heaven in the Bronx. “There’s a mystique, an aura, a tradition of success, that’s different than any other organization,” Headley said. “A down year or a down couple of years isn’t going to take away what’s been built over decades.”
It’s not clear whether Jeter’s Immaculate Farewell says more about an era that’s ending or some supernatural Yankee powers that will endure. And who knows what’s scarier: the Yankees resurgent or the Yankees so diminished they’re not really the Yankees? As they say, the opposite of love isn’t hate, it’s indifference, so Yankees fans and haters occupy seats on the same train.
But between Thursday’s Yankees Woodstock and my one trip to Yankee Stadium (a 5-2 victory with Masahiro Tanaka triumphant in his return), it felt depressingly like old times. It’s as if the Yankees don’t even have to be winners to look that way. I left clutching the fuzzy white Derek Jeter Beanie Buddy teddy bear they gave away in the press box, headed home in need of a 2011 Paso Robles cabernet sauvignon from the Yankees Reserve collection, and began worrying about next season.