Cleveland Cavaliers Cut Ties With General Manager David Griffin - The New York Times
David Griffin’s run as general manager of the Cleveland Cavaliers is over after one championship and three straight trips to the N.B.A. finals. Griffin and the team mutually parted ways Monday when the owner, Dan Gilbert, said Griffin’s contract would not be extended once it expired June 30.
Griffin’s departure came three days before the draft — the Cavs are currently without a pick — and on the eve of free agency. Cleveland could have a busy summer as it looks to revamp its roster after having lost to the Golden State Warriors in the finals.
A team spokesman said Trent Redden, the team’s senior vce president for basketball operations, was not returning, either. The assistant general manager, Koby Altman, remains with the team and is part of a group overseeing draft preparation and trade talks. The Cavs have reportedly been contacted by the Indiana Pacers in a potential deal for the Indiana All-Star Paul George.
Griffin, 47, had been Cleveland’s G.M. since May 2014. He oversaw the team’s return to prominence after LeBron James came back from Miami. Griffin orchestrated the trade that brought Kevin Love from Minnesota, and he bolstered the Cavs’ roster with other trades and free-agent signings.
JERRY WEST JOINS CLIPPERS The Hall of Famer Jerry West, fresh off helping the Golden State Warriors win another N.B.A. championship, is now officially a consultant with the Los Angeles Clippers.
Marcell Ozuna singled home the winning run with two outs in the ninth inning, and Miami overcame an early six-run deficit to edge visiting Washington, 8-7.
The Marlins slugger Justin Bour tied the game at 6-6 in the third inning with a grand slam, his 18th home run. Giancarlo Stanton also hit his 18th of the season to make it 7-7 in the seventh.
Bryce Harper hit his 18th home run for the Nationals, and Anthony Rendon also homered.
ROYALS OUTLAST RED SOX Whit Merrifield drove in the go-ahead run in the seventh inning, Eric Hosmer hit a two-run homer, and host Kansas City defeated Boston, 4-2, for its eighth win in nine games. With the Red Sox’ loss, the Yankees regained the lead in the American League East by half a game.
COLLEGE WORLD SERIES Bryce Fehmel limited Louisiana State to two hits in eight innings, K J Harrison hit the first C.W.S. grand slam at Omaha’s TD Ameritrade Park, and Oregon State (56-4) trounced the Tigers (49-18), 13-1, for its 23rd straight win. The top-seeded Beavers do not play again until Friday and need one more victory to advance to next week’s best-of-three finals. • Florida State (46-22) converted three walks, two infield singles and a double into three runs to take the lead in the seventh inning, and the Seminoles knocked Cal State Fullerton (39-24) out of the C.W.S. with a 6-4 win. The Seminoles will play another elimination game Wednesday against L.S.U.
Tiger Woods is getting help in managing his medications. “I’m currently receiving professional help to manage my medications and the ways that I deal with back pain and a sleep disorder,” Woods said in a statement.
Woods was charged with driving under the influence after the police in Jupiter, Fla., found him asleep at the wheel of his Mercedes-Benz about 2 a.m. May 29. Breath tests showed no presence of alcohol, but Woods told officers he had had a reaction to several prescription drugs, including Vicodin and Xanax. His arraignment has been delayed until Aug. 9.
Germany’s inexperienced side was given a fright by Australia at the Confederations Cup in Sochi, Russia, holding on to win its Group B opener, 3-2, after goalkeeper Bernd Leno gifted the Asian champions both goals. Only two members of Germany’s 2014 World-Cup-winning squad started the game.
Federal regulators are challenging the planned merger of FanDuel and DraftKings, the two largest daily fantasy sports sites, saying the combination would create a company controlling more than 90 percent of the market. The Federal Trade Commission announced it would file a complaint — along with the attorneys general of California and the District of Columbia — seeking to temporarily stop the deal, pending an administrative trial scheduled for Nov. 21.