U.S. Roster, if Not the Country, Starts to Catch W.B.C. Fever - The New York Times
SAN DIEGO — There is no Bryce Harper, Mike Trout or Kris Bryant in the lineup. The pitching staff does not include Clayton Kershaw or Madison Bumgarner — or even Noah Syndergaard, who gave voice to why, unlike in many other countries, so many Americans are uninterested in playing in the World Baseball Classic.
“Ain’t nobody make it to the Hall of Fame and win the World Series playing the W.B.C.,” Syndergaard said on the eve of the tournament.
So it was fitting that when the United States needed a lift on Wednesday night, it was offered by happy-to-be-representing Adam Jones, who is the son and brother of military men and who grew up about eight miles east of Petco Park.
On a night when the thick, salt air swallowed several deep drives, Jones belted a game-tying solo home run in the bottom of the eighth, and Eric Hosmer followed shortly thereafter with a two-run blast to carry the United States to a 4-2 victory over Venezuela.
As Jones and then Hosmer raced around the bases, they were greeted not only by fired-up teammates but also by hearty chants of “U-S-A” from a sparse but enthusiastic crowd of 16,635.
The scene served as a reminder that while the boisterous Dominicans and Puerto Ricans, plucky Team Israel and some scintillating games have garnered much of the attention, the Gutty Little Americans may yet have a voice in this tournament. The United States has advanced as far as the semifinals only once, in 2009, in three tries.
“The guys that are here, we want to win,” third baseman Nolan Arenado said. “That’s why we’re here.”
If the World Baseball Classic has become appointment viewing in some quarters of the baseball world, interest in the United States has been tepid. Members of the Spanish-language news media have far outnumbered their English-language counterparts here, and Jones noted that when he went to lunch with his wife, they overheard people wondering just what the tournament was all about.
“If you’re not watching MLB Network, you have no idea,” said Jones, who lamented that too many people were preoccupied with their N.C.A.A. tournament brackets. “But you look around the Latin countries and they know exactly what’s going on. Their awareness is at an all-time high right now. It seems like with the U.S. and the American people, it’s not as — I mean, generally they think of spring training right now and not a massive tournament going on.”
Among the more aware was Zack Rexine, who traveled from Baltimore for the tournament, showing his colors by dressing as George Washington and carrying an American flag.
“I obviously have hope or I wouldn’t be wearing this kitschy costume,” Rexine said. “But it is a little disappointing that the United States isn’t more into it. I wish I knew the answer why. There’s nothing more boring than watching a spring training game when guys are just out there getting reps. This means a lot more.”
The bonds for many teams in this tournament run deep. The Puerto Ricans and Venezuelans say they are motivated by the strife in their countries. Some major leaguers on the Netherlands team have known one another since their Little League days in Curaçao. The Dominicans are bound by their culture’s love of the game and in their shared journey of making it off the island.
Many of the ingredients for developing a clubhouse bonhomie on the fly are already in place.
But for the United States, more work is involved.
No more than two players come from the same major league team, and the 25 players on the roster on Wednesday came from 15 different states.
“I’ve been on six teams in the big leagues, and I don’t think there’s a single guy I’ve crossed paths with,” said Cleveland Indians reliever Andrew Miller, forgetting for a moment that he teamed with Jones for half a season in Baltimore. “Certainly we don’t have maybe the overlap of playing experiences that other teams do. I’d say we’re probably the team with the least amount of cohesiveness in a sense.”
Nevertheless, Miller added, there is a requisite amount of pride.
“We want to play better for the U.S., we want to do better than maybe the U.S. has done in this tournament in the past,” he said. “They’ve put a lot of great teams on the field, but there’s been three of them and we haven’t won any of them. This is the American pastime and all that stuff.”
The United States had a formidable task on its hands on Wednesday. The Venezuelan lineup was stacked with stars: Jose Altuve, Miguel Cabrera, Rougned Odor, Victor Martinez and Carlos Gonzalez. Felix Hernandez started on the mound.
The United States countered with Drew Smyly, who is Hernandez’s new teammate in Seattle. They shared a few words — as well as the No. 34 — while warming up.
There was also remarkably little difference in their effectiveness. Smyly struck out eight and also shattered three Venezuelan bats in four and two-thirds innings. He gave up only three hits, two of them bunts. But he left trailing by 1-0 because he threw away a bunt by Robinson Chirinos, who sent Gonzalez to third, where he scored on a sacrifice fly by Ender Inciarte in the third inning.
If the United States has a B-list starting staff, there has been nothing second rate about its performance. Chris Archer, Marcus Stroman, Danny Duffy and Smyly have not allowed an earned run in 17 ⅓ innings, allowing eight hits, no walks and striking out 22.
Still, there looked to be little promise on a night when Manager Jim Leyland rested Giancarlo Stanton and Buster Posey, and kept Daniel Murphy tethered to the bench.
Venezuela’s Jose Castillo, 21, a left-hander who has not pitched above Class A, struck out Christian Yelich and Arenado to end the sixth with two runners on. Then Odor hit a solo homer off David Robertson in the seventh to give Venezuela a 2-0 lead.
But Odor’s second error of the game helped the United States get a run back in the seventh when Hosmer scored on Jonathan Lucroy’s sacrifice fly, setting up Jones and Hosmer with opportunities to be heroes.
In the coming days, there will be other turns available, too. The victory put the Americans just where they were four years ago, when they won their opening game of the second round but then lost to the Dominican Republic and Puerto Rico, and were eliminated.
They will play Puerto Rico on Friday night and the Dominicans on Saturday night, when the Americans may not have audacious bat flips, dyed hair or golden plantains, but they’ll have an opportunity to make people pay attention just the same.