Dustin Johnson and Phil Mickelson Cruise at Match Play - The New York Times
Dustin Johnson and Phil Mickelson showed the simple side to the Dell Technologies Match Play in Austin, Tex. For three straight days in warmth, wind or rain, they built early leads and never let anyone get close to them in advancing out of their groups to the knockout stage.
For just about everyone else, it was a matter of surviving.
Friday was an easy day for Johnson and Mickelson.
Johnson, the No. 1 seed going for his third straight PGA Tour victory, again won the opening hole and showed why he might be the most feared player in golf at the moment. He shot 30 on the front nine, and all the PGA champion Jimmy Walker could do was make the match last as long as he could.
Johnson won, 5 and 3, and goes into the weekend having led all 46 holes he has played this week.
Mickelson made only two birdies, but he had no trouble during a 6-and-5 victory over J. B. Holmes. Mickelson has led 41 of his 42 holes this week.
The tournament is single-elimination the rest of the way, starting with the fourth round and the quarterfinals on Saturday.
KO FALLS SHORT AT KIA CLASSIC Top-ranked Lydia Ko of New Zealand missed the cut for just the second time in 91 L.P.G.A. Tour starts when she bogeyed two of her final three holes at the Kia Classic in Carlsbad, Calif.
Ko, the event’s defending champion, fell apart on the final three greens. She missed short putts on the 16th and 17th holes for a bogey and par, and three-putted No. 18, including missing a 10-footer just to the right, to finish a par round that left her two over for 36 holes.
The cut was at one over.
Cristie Kerr, the 2015 Kia champion, shot a three-under 69 to take a one-shot lead over Mo Martin and Mirim Lee.
With the Raiders pushing for a move to Las Vegas, Oakland made a last-minute effort to hang on to them.
Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf shared details of investors’ plans for a new stadium on the current Coliseum site and said that she and the city were doing all they could to keep the team.
In a letter to the N.F.L., Schaaf shared detailed renderings of what the $1.3 billion, 55,000-seat stadium would look like.
Schaaf wrote that the New York hedge fund Fortress Management Group was willing to work on terms for a $600 million contribution similar to the one Bank of America was offering for the Las Vegas stadium.
JETS HAPPY WITH QUARTERBACK SITUATION Jets General Manager Mike Maccagnan said it was “highly unlikely” that the team would add another veteran quarterback after signing Josh McCown earlier this week.
Maccagnan said McCown, 37, who signed Monday, has “good football left in him.” Deferring to Coach Todd Bowles, Maccagnan declined to say whether McCown would enter training camp as the starter over Bryce Petty and Christian Hackenberg.
Carli Lloyd did not need long to make an impact in the Women’s Champions League with Manchester City.
Lloyd, the two-time world player of the year and the captain for the United States team, scored the only goal in her debut as visiting Manchester City edged Denmark’s Fortuna Hjorring, 1-0, during the first leg of their Champions League quarterfinal late Thursday.
Lloyd, a midfielder, powered in a header in the 36th minute.
Rafael Nadal of Spain won his opening match at the Miami Open, holding every service game to beat Dudi Sela of Israel, 6-3, 6-4.
Nadal, playing in Key Biscayne, Fla., for the 13th time, has never won the tournament. He was the runner-up in 2005, 2008, 2010 and 2014.
Making Nadal’s bid easier was the absence of Novak Djokovic of Serbia and Andy Murray of Britain, who were both out with elbow injuries.
In women’s matches, Elena Vesnina of Russia made a quick exit just five days after winning the BNP Paribas Open in Indian Wells, Calif. Seeded 13th, Vesnina lost her opening match to the wild-card player Ajla Tomljanovic of Croatia, 3-6, 6-4, 7-5.
John Tavares and Anthony Beauvillier scored in a shootout to lead the Islanders over the Penguins, 4-3, in Pittsburgh.
Beauvillier opened the shootout with a goal, and Tavares snapped a wrist shot past Marc-Andre Fleury in the next round. Sidney Crosby scored in the shootout for the Penguins, but Islanders goaltender Jaroslav Halak, making his first start since Dec. 29, denied Phil Kessel and Nick Bonino.
Anders Lee scored his 28th goal of the season, while Brock Nelson got his 17th and Casey Cizikas his eighth for the Islanders, who moved into the second wild-card spot in the Eastern Conference.
BOSTON UNIVERSITY EDGES NORTH DAKOTA Charlie McAvoy scored midway through the second overtime period to lift Boston University to a 4-3 win over North Dakota, the defending national champion, in the semifinals of the N.C.A.A. West Regional in Fargo, N.D.
The Terriers (24-11-3), who were outshot, 59-29, advanced to the regional championship, while the season ended for the Fighting Hawks (21-16-3).
John Wall scored 22 points despite dealing with the symptoms of a migraine headache earlier in the day, Bradley Beal added 19, and the Washington Wizards easily handled the visiting Nets, 129-108. Justin Hamilton scored 20 points off the bench to lead the Nets.
Alejandro Valverde of Spain defeated his countryman Alberto Contador and the Englishman Chris Froome to win the decisive fifth stage of the Tour of Catalonia in Tortosa, Spain, and take the overall lead going into the weekend.
Valverde won after dominating the final climb of the 113-mile stage from Valls to Tortosa. He finished 13 seconds ahead of Froome and Contador.
Valverde opened a 21-second lead over Froome and a 47-second advantage on Contador in the overall standings.