Knicks as a Lottery Lock? Picking the Notion Apart - The New York Times
For Knicks fans anticipating the best possible draft lottery news on Tuesday night simply because they believe it is in the N.B.A.’s best interests to deliver it, here is David Stern to rain on your 19.9 percent parade. 
“My God, the league has had a string of successes that are continuing without a championship team in New York,” he said. “Haven’t the last 30 years been the proof against the idea that we had to have one?” 
Stern, who presided over the league as commissioner for 30 years until February 2014, knows how to hit skeptics where it hurts: right in the ego. Patrick Ewing? Frozen envelope? Lottery fix? 
On the telephone, you could almost hear the smirk on his face. 
The dependency on New York, Stern said, “was never true except in the minds of people who rooted for the Knicks and those who covered the sport in New York.”
He was clearly including the voice at the other end of the line. But in the interests of disclosure, let me say that I have never believed in the conspiracy theory that the inaugural draft lottery of 1985 was predetermined to land Ewing with the 24-58 Knicks. Never thought Stern would risk everything for, as he said, “something that would probably have been a criminal act.” 
That said, the notion that having a great team in New York at the time wasn’t a priority — if not a preoccupation — would be naïve. 
It is easy to look back to the 1979 arrival of Magic Johnson and Larry Bird and conclude that everyone lived happily and lucratively ever after. Even Stern conceded that the league’s ascension and eventual global prominence was a gradual process, over years.
While already riding the Boston-Los Angeles wave in 1985, the corporate shoe company agenda that would drive the popularity of the game’s biggest stars was in its infancy. There had been no explosion of television riches or an Internet reach to indoctrinate the basketball-loving masses. There was no way to know that the day was coming when any reasonably telegenic star could become transcendent, no matter the size of his market.
By today’s standards, that would be LeBron James in Cleveland and Kevin Durant in Oklahoma City as Exhibits A and B. 
When the stars of stage and screen beautified the courtside environment at Madison Square Garden in the late 1960s, Madison Avenue began to recognize the game’s potential high-end appeal, how it might blur the lines between entertainment and sports. But that was mostly a big-market concept, a New York-Los Angeles conceit.
By the time Ewing came along, Michael Jordan had taken his high-wire act and Nike shoe contract to Chicago, joining Bird and Johnson as the game’s most compelling impressionists. But Ewing was hyped as a generational game-changer, a Bill Russell reincarnate. It was only natural that the leaguewide buzz focused on how commercially impactful he could be if he helped to restore championship glory in New York. 
If the six other teams in a lottery that was not weighted by order of finish only pondered New York’s insider influence, Jack Krumpe, the Garden’s president, spoke openly of it on May 12, 1985.
In a swanky ballroom on the 18th floor of the Waldorf Astoria, Krumpe sized up a swelling news media crowd of about 100 and said: “Substitute San Antonio for New York, and there wouldn’t be half the people here. New York’s involved — that’s what’s making this so big.”
I had that pre-lottery chat with Krumpe while covering the event for The Daily News. The follow-up, posed in jest, was why the league wouldn’t manipulate the proceedings given the potential growth benefits for all. 
Krumpe, a big man with a hearty laugh, said: “Hey, I told them how to fix it 60 days ago. You call up Ernst & Whinney, and you say, ‘If we don’t get Ewing, you’re fired.’ ”
Ernst & Whinney, it turned out, was the powerhouse accounting firm that handled the business of Gulf & Western, the Garden’s corporate parent, and it had also been hired by the N.B.A., and one of its employees had privately placed the cards with the team names into the envelopes before the lottery took place between halves of a Boston-Philadelphia playoff game. 
Hence the frozen-envelope theory, supposedly allowing Stern to identify the Knicks’ winning ticket.
Asked that day if he knew about what could be perceived as a conflict, Stern said, “No, I didn’t.” In a recent interview, he said he’d forgotten more than he remembered, mostly recalling being nervous because he had “never been a game-show host.” 
Throughout the years, no commissioner had to deal with the multitude of conspiracy charges that Stern encountered. Much of this the league brought on itself by selling individuals over teams, the constant carping by coaches about officiating that has fed the notion of engineered playoff advancement for the most popular stars and a history of big-market indulgence that traces all the way back to Ned Irish, the Garden’s impresario when the league was born.
How much did the league figure in the Ewing lottery? Probably as much as the horseshoe from a champion pacer at Yonkers Raceway, where John Cirillo, the team’s public relations man, had previously worked. Cirillo placed it in Dave DeBusschere’s pocket before DeBusschere, the Knicks’ top basketball executive, took the stage.
When DeBusschere played for the Knicks, the N.B.A. was still more of a mom-and-pop, grass-roots league. These days, its arenas are glorified television studios — it matters less and less where they actually are. So when Tony Kornheiser on ESPN contends that it is predetermined for the Knicks and the Lakers to finish 1-2 in Tuesday’s lottery to grab the Ewing wannabes Karl-Anthony Towns and Jahlil Okafor, it’s because the conspiracy narrative has become a kneejerk gag line, largely played out.
The upside, as Stern said in 1985, was that “people are talking about the lottery instead of drugs, unauthorized franchise moves or anything else negative.”
Thirty years later, the trade-off is probably still a deal that most game-show hosts and contestants would happily make.