With Antonio Brown’s Outstretched Hand, the Steelers Seize the A.F.C. North - The New York Times
PITTSBURGH — With the clock ticking and a season filled with promise evaporating, Steelers quarterback Ben Roethlisberger took the snap, turned to his left and put the A.F.C. North title in the hands of Antonio Brown.
Brown, the Steelers’ star wide receiver, caught the ball at the Baltimore 1-yard line and waited for the hit he knew was coming. When it arrived from Ravens safety Eric Weddle and linebacker C. J. Mosley, Brown ducked his head and stretched the ball across the goal line for a division-clinching touchdown that embodied his team’s considerable resilience.
After reeling in November — and reeling even early in the fourth quarter at home on Sunday against an archrival that has more than had their number in recent years — the Steelers found a way to reach the playoffs anyway and eliminate the Ravens from postseason contention.
Brown’s lunging 4-yard score with nine seconds left lifted Pittsburgh to a gripping 31-27 victory and a second division title in three years, delivering just as Brown said Steelers running back Le’Veon Bell had predicted.
“Over there by the heaters before the final drive, he said, ‘A. B., you got to go down there and get the game winner,’” Brown said.
It was a play that Brown’s teammates have seen many times, just never with so much on the line.
“That’s A. B.,” said receiver Demarcus Ayers, who drew a pass-interference penalty to help set up Brown's score. “He does it so much in practice, it doesn’t ‘wow’ you in a game. In this particular moment it’s like, ‘He’s done it again.’”
Brown finished with 10 receptions for 96 yards to join the Hall of Fame receiver Marvin Harrison as the only players with four straight 100-catch seasons. Roethlisberger shook off two third-quarter interceptions to finish with 279 yards passing and three touchdowns. Bell ran for 122 yards and a score and hauled in another on an ad-libbed play by Roethlisberger as Pittsburgh rallied from a 10-point deficit to win its sixth straight game.
The Steelers (10-5) will host a game during wild-card weekend on either Jan. 7 or 8, heady territory given that they were 4-5 after a loss to Dallas on Nov. 13.
“I think today showed some resolve,” Roethlisberger said. “I think we showed some fight, no quit.”
The Ravens (8-7) took the lead on Kyle Juszczyk’s 10-yard burst up the middle with 1 minute 18 seconds left. But Roethlisberger calmly took 10 plays to lead the Steelers 75 yards, the last 4 on a play that could live on in team history — depending on how far Pittsburgh’s momentum can carry it.
Joe Flacco passed for 262 yards, including a pretty 18-yard pass to Steve Smith Sr. that put Baltimore up by 14-7 early in the third quarter. Smith ended up with seven receptions for 79 yards, but the Ravens crumbled late. Their defense put up little resistance as Roethlisberger calmly put his team in position to return to the playoffs.
Ravens linebacker Terrell Suggs said his unit had entered the game intending to keep the Steelers’ three stars — Roethlisberger, Brown and Bell — from putting their stamp on the game. They did it anyway.
“They’re a good team,” Suggs said. “They’re well deserving. They won the division; we’ll applaud them. But we’ll be back.”
The Steelers’ playoff hopes seemed to be disappearing in the third quarter. Roethlisberger twice threw interceptions deep in Pittsburgh territory — both on poorly thrown balls to well-covered targets — that helped the Ravens take control of the game, albeit briefly.
“It’s pretty special the way we won it,” Roethlisberger said. “Especially after feeling the way I felt at a certain point in that game and feeling like you let guys down and you blew it.”
Instead, it is the Ravens who will spend a long off-season wondering how their mastery over the Steelers — and a potential postseason berth — dissolved in the final 12 minutes. Baltimore will miss the playoffs for the third time in four seasons.
“With everything you work for and you don’t reach your goal, so it’s, it’s just somber,” Weddle said. “It’s down.
“Give them credit. Ben got it rolling.”