Aaron Judge Has the Power to Teach a Pitcher - The New York Times
SEATTLE — When Andrew Moore was pitching in college, he began to keep a journal in which he would make notations after each game — cues he could begin to use as a personal reference library. It might be something he wanted to improve on in his next game, the location of a particular pitch to a particular hitter, or his mentality that led to a success or failure.
“It’s been a huge tool for me,” said Moore, a 23-year-old rookie right-hander who has risen quickly through the Seattle Mariners’ system. “I plan on doing it the rest of my career.”
So it was that late Friday, Moore typed an unpleasant notation in his journal after the Yankees’ Aaron Judge clubbed Moore’s 2-1 hanging curveball so high and deep that it nearly became the first ball hit out of Safeco Field. The ball landed in the next-to-last row of the upper deck in left field — about 15 feet shy of leaving the park.
It was the 31st home run of the season for Judge — and his first since the All-Star break, when his immense power was on display as he won the Home Run Derby. He followed with his 32nd homer on Saturday in the Yankees’ 6-5 loss in 10 innings.
While Judge has hit nearly half his home runs (15) at least 425 feet — his 31st was measured at 440 — Friday was the first opportunity for a handful of new teammates to witness Judge’s power firsthand.
Reliever David Robertson, reacquired from the Chicago White Sox last week, said that even with the heavy air here, it looked as if Judge were playing in a Little League bandbox. Third baseman Todd Frazier, obtained in the trade with Robertson, said he was slack-jawed sitting next to shortstop Didi Gregorius in the dugout when Judge hit his home run.
“It’s like one of the seven wonders of the world,” Frazier said. “It’s something to see. You just don’t see balls hit that far and that high. It’s not only that far, it’s how high they go and with such ease and no effort. It’s just A to B and pow. It’s a really beautiful thing.”
In all, Judge drove in four runs in the Yankees’ 5-1 victory on Friday — putting them ahead with a sacrifice fly to deep center field before adding the three-run homer. It was the type of performance that Judge, who was in a 4-for-30 slump before Friday’s home run, could use more of as their offense has scuffled since the All-Star break.
With Starlin Castro headed to the disabled list with another hamstring injury that he sustained on Wednesday — his third dating to September — the Yankees would certainly welcome a return to form of their most imposing hitter as they try to remain in the playoff hunt.
While the Yankees craned their necks and pointed to where the ball might leave the ballpark, Moore did not look to see where it landed. He had struck Judge out looking at a fastball on the outside corner in the first inning, but he was upset with himself for leaving a full-count changeup over the plate that Judge hit for the sacrifice fly — and for offering up a letter-high curveball on the home run.
“I got too touchy-feely with it,” Moore said. “If I’m more aggressive with it, maybe I throw it a foot lower and he hits a ground ball or swings through it.”
And maybe Moore is writing a different story.