Rafael Nadal to Face Novak Djokovic in a Madrid Semifinal - The New York Times
Rafael Nadal withstood a challenge from David Goffin, 7-6 (3), 6-2, to reach the Madrid Open semifinals. In a meeting between the players with the most match wins this year, Nadal saved all five break points he faced to win his 13th straight match.
Goffin, who has 27 victories, was trying to make it to his third final this season. He saved all six break opportunities he conceded to Nadal in the first set, but Nadal took control of the tiebreaker under the closed roof on center court.
Nadal, a four-time champion in Madrid, had an easier time in the second set after earning an early break, and he closed out the match with another at the end.
Nadal’s tour-leading 32nd victory set up a semifinal against the defending champion Novak Djokovic, who advanced when Kei Nishikori withdrew before their match because of a wrist injury.
On the women’s side, the defending champion Simona Halep cruised past Anastasija Sevastova, 6-2, 6-3, to reach the final, where she will face Kristina Mladenovic.
The Dallas Stars have signed goaltender Ben Bishop to a six-year, $29.5 million deal. General Manager Jim Nill announced the terms less than a week after acquiring the rights to Bishop, 30, from the Los Angeles Kings for a fourth-round pick in next month’s draft.
CZECHS BEAT SLOVENIA Roman Horak scored two quick goals as the Czech Republic beat Slovenia, 5-1, at the ice hockey world championship. The win in Paris moved the Czech Republic into second in Group B, 1 point above Switzerland and 2 behind Canada, which is chasing a third straight title.
Stephane Da Costa saved France in a tense 4-3 shootout win against Belarus in Paris that kept his team’s quarterfinal hopes alive, while co-host Germany lost to Denmark in overtime in Cologne. With the top four teams from each group advancing to the quarterfinals, Germany was in fifth place in Group A and France in sixth in Group B.
A former gymnast testified in Mason, Mich., that as a teenager, she had turned to a prominent sports doctor for treatment of back problems but instead was repeatedly molested. Theassaults have haunted her for nearly two decades, she said.
Rachael Denhollander, 32, was the first witness to speak at a critical court hearing for Larry Nassar, a former Michigan State University doctor who also worked for U.S.A. Gymnastics, which trains Olympians. A judge must decide whether there is enough evidence to send him to trial on sexual-assault charges.
It is one of four criminal cases against Nassar, including a child pornography case in federal court. He has pleaded not guilty. The allegations have rocked Michigan State and U.S.A. Gymnastics, whose president resigned in March because of how the organization responded to sexual complaints against coaches.
Barcelona said its board had approved a development plan to have a team in the National Women’s Soccer League. Barcelona said it wanted to field the team in 2018. It was not clear whether Barcelona would acquire an existing team or seek an expansion team.
The Australian rider Caleb Ewan won the seventh stage of the Giro d’Italia in a sprint finish while Bob Jungels held on to the pink jersey. For his first career win in the Giro, Ewan finished half a wheel ahead of the Colombian rider Fernando Gaviria. Sam Bennett of Ireland crossed third, while the sprinting standout Andre Greipel was fourth after the mainly flat but lengthy 139-mile route from Castrovillari to Alberobello.
Doug DeCinces, a former third baseman for the Orioles and the Angels, has been convicted on 13 counts in a federal insider-trading case in Santa Ana, Calif. Prosecutors said DeCinces, 66, received advance warning of a merger from the chief executive of a medical device company.
AROUND THE MAJORS Ervin Santana allowed two hits in seven innings, Miguel Sano homered, and the Minnesota Twins beat the Indians, 1-0, in Cleveland. Santana lowered his earned run average to 1.50. ■ Joey Gallo hit a game-ending three-run homer off a foul pole, sending the Texas Rangers past the visiting Oakland Athletics, 5-2. ■ Joe Biagini and four relievers combined on a seven-hitter as the Blue Jays beat the Seattle Mariners, 4-0, in Toronto.