Ben McAdoo Opens Giants’ Camp With Lesson From a Lion Lothario - The New York Times
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J. — When players arrive for training camp, it is customary for an N.F.L. coach to deliver a motivational message to his team. The typical themes of such speeches are perseverance, teamwork, toughness.
And lifelong virility. At least if Ben McAdoo is the coach.
This is what happens when the Giants — a storied and stoic franchise — hand the reins to one of the youngest coaches in the league.
That’s right: A new generation is taking over, forever changing the meaning of “pep talk.”
McAdoo, 40, who is entering his second year as the coach, regaled his charges with two dramatic readings on the first day of camp on Thursday. One was a Victorian-era poem by Rudyard Kipling. The other was the bawdy, carnal story of Frasier the lion.
McAdoo told reporters that the lion story was directed at the “experienced” players in the room — later clarifying that he meant players older than 26.
While McAdoo did not elaborate on the details or the meaning of Frasier’s story, it was not long before internet searches revealed the salacious details: Frasier was an aged, sleepy, all-but-lame lion rescued from a circus in Mexico in the early 1970s by a zoo in Southern California. As detailed in several national magazines at the time, Frasier was placed on a special diet of vitamins and soon went from lazy to Lothario.
The zoo had a group of lionesses who had rejected other male lions but warmly welcomed Frasier, who went on to father 33 cubs over the next 16 months, according to a story in Life magazine.
Life called him “the country’s reigning sex simba.”
Frasier fan clubs were formed. T-shirts and bumper stickers bearing Frasier’s likeness were sold nationwide. Perhaps not coincidentally, Frasier also recently gained some renewed pop culture fame in an episode of the HBO series, “The Leftovers.”
A Giants spokesman confirmed that McAdoo was referring to the same Frasier the lion of the 1970s.
The point?
“It was a message about how old guys don’t always lose their old form,” the spokesman said.
It was a ribald story that might not find a receptive audience at, say, a convent, but in a room of professional football players back together again for the first time in months, it was as popular as an endless dessert bar.
McAdoo was reportedly all but carried away on the shoulders of his players after the story.
After his initial visit with reporters, McAdoo was not available to expound on his reasons for unearthing the story of Frasier, and the few players who were available on Thursday met with reporters before McAdoo spoke.
McAdoo did explain why he chose a reading of Kipling’s 19th-century poem “If.” The most quoted line from the poem, which reads like parental advice, is perhaps:
“If you can meet with Triumph and Disaster;/and treat those two impostors just the same.”
McAdoo first discovered the poem last month. He listened to a recording of it with his son, B J, and on Thursday indicated that it was aimed at the younger players on the Giants.
“I think 25 and under,” McAdoo said. “It’s a pretty powerful poem.”
He continued: “We have a youth group and an experienced group. We have players ranging from 21 years old to 36 years old. That’s a big age difference. The good teams merge well and jell well, and we need to do that. Empathy is a big part of that — a 36-year-old understanding what a 20-year-old is going through and a 20-year-old trying to understand what a 36-year-old is going through.”
That was the most forthcoming that McAdoo, a voracious reader who often surprises his players with quirky discourses, videos and stage demonstrations, was about his presentation to the team.
Asked what moved him to read poetry and resurrect an old lion’s tale, McAdoo smiled and answered: “Just trying to get better.”