As Knicks Rebuild, a Bulldozer May Help - The New York Times
Sometime very soon, Carmelo Anthony and his people will need to sit down with Phil Jackson and his people, including Coach Derek Fisher and especially the Knicks’ owner, James L. Dolan, to lay some cards on the table. They will need to acknowledge that jokers in Knicks uniforms are running wild and that the quick Jackson fix that Anthony believed he was signing up for last summer is not happening this season or quite possibly next season.
With each passing day, with every dysfunctional defeat, it becomes more apparent that this rebuilding project could be a multiyear process. How much of what remains of Anthony’s prime does he wish to devote to it? Would he consider waiving the no-trade clause the Knicks reportedly gave him months ago and be happier moving on, if that could be arranged?
The happy talk of last summer — how Anthony was staying because he believed in Jackson’s system, how the triangle offense would bring sense and stability — has surrendered to the dark reality of a team unschooled in fundamentals at both ends of the floor and not very athletic running up and down it. Forget for the moment what system it plays; Jackson’s first Knicks team flat-out stinks to the tune of 4-20, and how much worse could it be without Anthony, its $124 million centerpiece?
In his latest State of the Sinking Union address, Jackson spoke of wanting Anthony to expand his game, which presumably meant to grow as the kind of star more invested in making others around him better, more than being the scoring machine he has been for 11-plus seasons.
The next night, in New Orleans, Anthony seemed to shrink, not expand, playing 39 minutes, taking 11 shots from the field and registering not a single assist. He looked and moved indifferently, deferring on offense to a resurgent Amar’e Stoudemire.
That game and Wednesday night’s 109-95 loss to the defending champion Spurs’ B team in San Antonio were obscured by reports of Anthony-related turmoil infecting the Knicks’ locker room and the news that Anthony was struggling with soreness in his left knee. He sat out the San Antonio game, in which the Spurs could have played their assistant coach Becky Hammon, the retired franchise icon George Gervin and a couple of dudes from a downtown playground and still dropped 100 on the defensively inept Knicks.
How depressing all this must be for Anthony, who — let’s face it — re-signed with the Knicks because going elsewhere would have cost him tens of millions. Many wondered how much he needed, which is easier to do when it is not your money. But now Anthony has the deal only the Knicks could give him, and he would carry it elsewhere if he were willing to concede that staying in New York from a competitive point of view had been a mistake.
There is, of course, a franchise benefit to such volume losing: the possibility of landing a top lottery prize in what is shaping up as a deep 2015 draft with at least two premier freshman centers in Duke’s Jahlil Okafor and Kentucky’s Karl-Anthony Towns. For that reason, Magic Johnson recently posted on Twitter that he was rooting for his beloved Los Angeles Lakers to lose every night.
“Last year’s draft there were no superstars,” he wrote. “This year there are about 3-4 superstars in college basketball and we need one of them!”
It is instructive to recall that bottoming out at 20-62 while David Robinson missed the 1996-97 season was what created the Tim Duncan dynasty in San Antonio. But if landing the next Anthony Davis becomes part of the game plan, then so must the understanding that the Knicks would be getting not Duncan, who entered the league as a four-year college player, but a teenager in need of time to grow into his game.
That process would be mitigated by the addition of a premier free agent to partner with Anthony, using the salary-cap space the Knicks will have. But as Jackson admitted Monday, he correctly worries about how the developing season’s disaster is making the Knicks an unattractive option to potential free agents like LaMarcus Aldridge and Marc Gasol.
Reports of turmoil, dissatisfaction with the triangle and Anthony’s involvement as one of the perpetrators and not a problem-solver cannot help. On top of that, the notion of big-time players lining up to join a 31-year-old Anthony while taking less money from the Knicks than their current teams could offer has always seemed an imaginative stretch.
At 30, and showing signs of wear in part from the heavy minutes he has played and the punishment he has absorbed in New York, Anthony still seems better suited to become part of a more established star core elsewhere. Beyond the physical dynamic, he was never the ideal leading man and does not appear capable of evolving into one.
What George Karl, his former coach in Denver, told me about Anthony last spring was fair and astute. “I don’t think Melo understands that coming to work with the best attitude every single day is a precious commodity when you’re the best player,” he said. “That’s not the same thing as playing hard. That’s bringing the total package, 100 percent focused on all the little things. Those are rare breeds. Kevin Garnett. Michael Jordan. LeBron didn’t always have it, but he has it now. Melo doesn’t get an A in that department; maybe not much more than a B-minus.”
What Karl meant was that putting Anthony in the most optimal of conditions would involve having a player who may not be as productive and as much a brand-name star, but one who would hold more sway in the daily operation of the team.
Anthony’s team has won fewer games than an Indiana team that at times has played without a single starter from last season’s Eastern Conference finalists. It has lost one more game than the tanking Philadelphia 76ers.
Given all the salary-cap considerations and especially the questions about his health, trading Anthony any time soon might not be easy. But should the knee soreness dissipate while the losing continues, shouldn’t the question at least be asked? With his near-max money banked, wouldn’t the possibility of joining Houston or Dallas — to name two teams that wanted him last summer — be a tempting proposition?
Wouldn’t trying to obtain young assets, maybe a draft pick or two, make sense for Jackson and the Knicks as they ponder the increasing likelihood of a long reconstruction?
The way they are going, at the rate they are losing, the do-over option for Anthony and the Knicks should at least be on the table.