University of Houston Postpones Game in Wake of Hurricane Harvey - The New York Times
The Houston Cougars could have played their football game at Texas-San Antonio on Saturday. Instead they chose to postpone it, deciding there were things much more important than football this week with Houston besieged by catastrophic flooding from Hurricane Harvey.
“We felt like it wasn’t the right thing to do in terms of where our city is,” Houston Coach Major Applewhite said. “Sports are important and sports are fun and it’s entertainment, but with casualties in our city and the state of mind of our players and our players’ families, it’s not the right thing to do, to play a game.”
Officials said they would explore options for rescheduling the game.
The Texans are playing their “home” preseason game on the road against the Dallas Cowboys. The Rice football team has not been home in days, holed up in Fort Worth on the Texas Christian campus after a game in Sydney, Australia, over the weekend.
STAFFORD GETS N.F.L.’S RICHEST DEAL Matthew Stafford has more time, and money, to accomplish what the Detroit Lions drafted him to do. The Lions gave Stafford, their standout quarterback, a five-year extension worth $135 million, keeping him under contract through 2022. The franchise desperately hopes he can return the investment and help it finally achieve playoff success. Stafford’s contract surpassed what was — briefly — the richest deal in the league. Derek Carr signed a $125 million, five-year deal earlier this summer with the Oakland Raiders.
REDSKINS LOSE TAYLOR FOR SEASON Washington Redskins defensive tackle Phil Taylor is out for the season after tearing his left quadriceps tendon. After injuries derailed his career with the Cleveland Browns, Taylor, a 2011 first-round pick, was a good bet to make the Redskins’ roster almost three years since he last played a regular-season game.
RAIDERS’ TOP PICK PRACTICES The Oakland Raiders’ first-round pick, cornerback Gareon Conley, passed his physical and has been taken off the physically unable to perform list. Conley took part in practice for the first time since injuring his shin during minicamp June 13.
COLTS CORNERBACK IS HOBBLED The two-time Indianapolis Colts Pro Bowl cornerback Vontae Davis is listed as week to week after Coach Chuck Pagano said a “pretty significant” groin injury was diagnosed.
GIANTS WAIVE DEFENSIVE END The Giants waived the third-year defensive end Owa Odighizuwa a day after the N.F.L. suspended him for the first four games of the regular season for violating the league’s policy on performance-enhancing substances.
Monaco, the defending Ligue 1 champion, signed forwards Stevan Jovetic from Inter Milan and Keita Balde from Lazio, pre-empting the anticipated departure of Kylian Mbappe to Paris Saint-Germain. P.S.G. is reportedly close to sealing a loan move for Mbappe, with an option to acquire the 18-year-old for 180 million euros ($216 million) next season.
P.S.G. is not in a position to land Mbappe right now. It signed Neymar from Barcelona this month for a world-record 222 million euros ($262 million) and is restricted by rules designed to curtail excessive spending by clubs each season. Balde, 22, who plays for Senegal, scored 16 goals for Lazio in Serie A last season and has signed a five-year deal. Jovetic, 27, signed a four-year deal.
SAUDI ARABIA LOSES CUP QUALIFIER Saudi Arabia’s hopes of automatic qualification for the 2018 World Cup were hit by a 2-1 loss to the host United Arab Emirates in an Asian Group B game. Saudi Arabia is second in Group B, but Australia has a game in hand and is behind on goal difference only.
GALAXY ADD FORMER SAN JOSE COACH The struggling Los Angeles Galaxy have hired the former San Jose coach Dominic Kinnear as an assistant to Sigi Schmid. Kinnear is one of four coaches to win multiple M.L.S. Cup titles, leading the Houston Dynamo to championships in 2006 and 2007. He was fired in June by the Earthquakes, who were 27-31-27 during his tenure. The Galaxy (6-14-5) are winless in their first five games under Schmid, the winningest coach in M.L.S. history.
Chris Froome kept his Vuelta a España lead by avoiding trouble in the difficult final descent of Stage 10, which was won by Matteo Trentin. It was the second stage victory for Trentin, an Italian, who outsprinted the Spaniard Jose Joaquin Rojas at the end of the 164.8-kilometer (102.4-mile) ride from Caravaca de la Cruz to Alhama de Murcia in southeastern Spain.
Froome, the Tour de France winner, finished 24th in the stage but stayed 36 seconds ahead of Esteban Chaves of Colombia and Nicolas Roche of Ireland, his closest challengers in the overall standings.
Royals pitcher Danny Duffy has been cited on suspicion of driving under the influence in suburban Kansas City last weekend, another headache for a team struggling on the field. Duffy had left the team’s trip to return to Kansas City for a magnetic resonance imaging test on his ailing left elbow. Duffy is one of the organization’s most popular players, not only for his on-field production but his work in the community. Duffy, a left-hander who signed a $65 million, five-year contract extension earlier this year, is 8-8 with a 3.78 earned run average.
Sid Wilson, a New York City high school star, has requested to transfer from St. John’s before his freshman season starts. St. John’s has granted the 6-foot-7 Wilson permission to speak with other Division I programs. Before signing with St. John’s in May, Wilson spent his senior year at Brewster Academy in New Hampshire, where he helped lead the Bobcats to the 2017 National Prep Championship. He had also attended St. Raymond in the Bronx.