The Antiseptic Truth About the Yankees-Red Sox Rivalry - The New York Times
Sometime around the third inning Friday evening, as we sat in our upper-deck aerie and watched the Yankees battle the Red Sox, my son Nick and I gestured at the weirdly placid crowd and exchanged shrugs of confusion.
Once upon a donnybrook, to attend a Red Sox clash with the Yankees was like getting an engraved invitation to watch Visigoths trade ax blows with the legions of imperial Rome.
This night, we heard no frenzied screams or vulgar chants demanding that Red Sox players commit physically impossible acts. It was as menacing as an accountants’ convention.
We rode the B subway line here as National League infiltrators, hapless Mets fans in search of meaningful late-season baseball. We intended to root for the Red Sox, operating on the age-old and mindless theory that the enemy of our enemy was our friend. As we waded through the endless lines outside (security at Yankee Stadium is Department of Homeland Security cubed, a maze of questionable barriers), police officers in full body armor walked past.
I gave Nick a knowing look. This is why I left my father’s old Boston Braves cap at home, and why it was just as well that my son had not donned his Pedro Martinez jersey. Red Sox-Yankees offers a demented land.
Or not.
For years, I regaled Nick and his brother Aidan with tales of the Red Sox and Yankees’ tribal wars, which lasted from the 1970s to the early years of this century. To get the flavor, here is Alan Richman, a Boston Globe columnist writing of Yankee fans, circa 1978:
“Not since the Panzer Corps reunions were declared illegal have so many misanthropes, malcontents and just plain miserable people gathered to have a good time.”
And here was the great New York columnist Larry Merchant on the mood at Yankee Stadium awaiting the arrival of those “doughty” Red Sox (Bostonians, for affectations known only to themselves, adore words with Olde English roots). The crowd at the Stadium, he wrote, “was magnificently hostile, a collision of separate needs and collective memory.”
The Yankees’ owner then, George Steinbrenner, with his ersatz Vince Lombardi imitations, made a delicious heavy. Explaining why he might fire his manager, Billy Martin, for the sin of losing to the Red Sox, Steinbrenner explained, “He’s not going to push me to the wall without getting thrown over it.”
This was a man I could root against joyfully.
As my Mets descended into a bottomless chasm of losing in the 1970s and early 1980s, my buddies Peter Kurz and Fred Cooper and I trooped up to Yankee Stadium like desert wayfarers in search of an oasis. We rooted loudly for the Red Sox: Carl Yastrzemski and Jim Rice and Rick Burleson and George Scott, who was known as Boomer and was a big slugger and a balletic defender with the glove he called Black Beauty.
Life in the Yankee Stadium upper deck was bracingly Darwinian — flat beer, loose joints and anything goes. We survived with rigorous adherence to behavioral rites: You befriended the natives, wrapped your Yankee insults in a Bubble Wrap of smiles and never narrowed your eyes when the natives heaped insults on you. If the Red Sox held the lead after five or six innings, self-preservation dictated shutting up and hunkering down. By the eighth or ninth inning, Yankee Stadium became an outtake from “The Warriors” — the Rogues against the Riffs.
Punches and beers flew. One impossibly humid night, I watched fans (it would be redundant to call them drunks) in the upper deck hurling beers down onto the bleachers. The bleacher inhabitants, stripped to their waists, picked up baseballs and hurled them back in futile loops at the upper deck. I believe they were all Yankee fans. It was like a 16th-century religious war, schismatics fighting over causes too obscure for an outsider to understand.
In truth, I sort of liked those old Yankees, Ron Guidry and Chris Chambliss and Willie Randolph. When I worked as a doorman on the East Side, a tenant told me that Reggie Jackson had parked his Mercedes on Second Avenue. I ran down there to find Jackson, the great egocentric slugger, leaning against the hood and holding court.
Truth compels me to acknowledge that the Yankees of today are not so easy to root against.
Aaron Judge, going through a Titanic readjustment to the American League pitchers’ collective adjustment to him, is a fine young slugger. Luis Severino is a former whippet who appears to be on a path toward becoming a fine pitcher. The general manager, Brian Cashman, has revamped this Yankee team with the dispatch of a good pit man at the Indianapolis 500.
Didi Gregorius is a sweet fielder and hitter with a great baseball name.
Can I stop now?
Any more Yankee compliments and I am going to break out in hives. I hail from a National League family — my parents were Giants fans before that team departed for California. They signed on with the Mets in 1962 and never let go. My sons will be in a state of high agitation these next few nights as the Mets face off against the Yankees in a four-game, home-and-home series that begins on Monday.
The cooling of the Red Sox-Yankees rivalry requires anthropological exploration.
Some years back, the Yankees inexplicably tore down their magnificent old stadium and put up a faceless corporate facsimile. You enter through a dull concourse; the prevailing aesthetic is Death Star. (I overstate? The scoreboard Friday evening introduced a Yankee with an image of Darth Vader and the sound of heavy breathing.) Nosebleed tickets run close to $100, with various inane fees totaled up.
So the hoi polloi of which I was a proud tribesman have trouble digging up scratch for admittance.
More benignly, the Boston news media — which writes longingly of those old tribal wars — has noted that a proper blood feud takes time. The best Red Sox and Yankee players are youngsters, and they do not yet comprehend the joy of rumbling with their rivals.
This feud is like a Broadway play in previews. We exited the stadium that evening — the Yankees had rallied nicely against the Red Sox’ formidable reliever corps, winning 5-4 — and there were no gloriously vulgar chants and no phalanx of police cars needed to extract the Red Sox team bus from deep in enemy territory.
The upside is that neither of us had been forced to take a beer bath.
We counted our luck and walked to the elevated subway.