Texas Boy Could Be Kept From Defending Girls’ Title - The New York Times
Texas lawmakers are considering a bill that could prevent a transgender high school wrestler the chance to defend his girls’ state championship next year.
The wrestler, Mack Beggs, won a state championship in the classification for the state’s largest schools in February. But a proposal that has already passed the state Senate would allow the University Interscholastic League, the state’s governing body for public high school sports, to disqualify an athlete who is undergoing hormone therapy.
Beggs, who had a 56-0 record en route to the title, drew complaints that his steroid therapy treatment had given him an unfair advantage against girls who risked injury just by getting on the mat with him.
The proposal would require transgender students like Beggs to turn over medical information to the interscholastic league, which could prevent an athlete from competing if the safety or fairness of the competition would be “substantially affected by the student’s steroid use.”
Texas requires transgender athletes to compete in the gender listed on their birth certificates. That meant Beggs had to wrestle against girls against his wishes. The proposed bill would not change that rule.
Washington Capitals forward Alex Ovechkin finished the playoffs with a lower-body injury that required pain-numbing injections, the Russian Hockey Federation said.
The federation said that the injury would prevent Ovechkin from playing in the International Ice Hockey Federation world championship.
Ovechkin did not miss a game during the playoffs, but he was moved to the third line midway through the Capitals’ second-round series against the Pittsburgh Penguins, who eliminated the Capitals in Game 7 on Wednesday.
RUSSIA CRUISES The Russian team did not seem to need Ovechkin when it scored three times in a span of 70 seconds to beat Denmark, 3-0, in Cologne, Germany. It was the fourth straight victory for Russia, which leads Group A with 11 points. Also in Cologne, Gabriel Landeskog and Elias Lindholm scored in Sweden’s 2-0 victory over Latvia, which was third in the group, behind the United States.
In Group B, the defending champion Canada rallied to beat France, 3-2, in Paris to remain undefeated and atop the group with 12 points. Also in Group B, the Czech Republic beat Norway, 1-0, in Paris on an overtime goal by Jan Kovar off an assist by Boston Bruins winger David Pastrnak.
Jason Vargas, the owner of the best earned run average in the major leagues, went seven scoreless innings and the Kansas City Royals beat the host Tampa Bay Rays, 6-0.
Vargas (5-1) allowed dropped his E.R.A. from 1.19 to 1.01.
Salvador Perez had a two-run double during a five-run eighth inning for the Royals, who won three of four against the Rays. Tampa Bay’s Jake Odorizzi (2-2) gave up one run and four hits in six innings.
BETTS’S BLAST LIFTS BOSTON Mookie Betts hit a three-run homer in the ninth inning and the Boston Red Sox beat the Brewers, 4-1, in Milwaukee.
It was Betts’s fifth homer and his third in four games, and it helped Boston get one win in the three-game series.
THREE JAILED IN CUBA A Cuban court jailed three men for trafficking baseball players to the United States.
The three defendants were given sentences of between eight and 10 years for actions that began in 2015 with the help of a contact in the Dominican Republic, according to a report in the provincial newspaper Escambray.
The Cuban government has been seeking an accord with Major League Baseball to regularize transfers of Cuban players. (AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE)
Cleveland Browns receiver Josh Gordon was denied reinstatement by the N.F.L. on Thursday and must reapply in the fall, according to multiple news media reports.
Gordon is serving the latest in a series of suspensions for violating the league’s substance-abuse policy. He was also suspended for 10 games in 2014 and all of 2015.
Gordon, 26, led the N.F.L. with 1,646 receiving yards in 2013, but he has played in just five games since.
TWO TITANS SUED Receiver Tajae Sharpe and offensive lineman Sebastian Tretola of the Tennessee Titans are named in a federal lawsuit claiming Sharpe assaulted a man after he made comments about Sharpe’s job security.
The suit filed Wednesday said Sharpe knocked Dante R. Satterfield unconscious last month after a conversation about the Titans’ decision to draft receiver Corey Davis in the first round. The lawsuit said Tretola was a lookout.
Sharpe’s agent, Blaine Roche, told The Tennessean that the claims were ridiculous.
TEAM OWNER SENTENCED David Staral, the former owner of the Chicago Rush of the Arena Football League, was sentenced to 3 ½ years in prison for defrauding investors. During his brief ownership, Rush players and vendors went unpaid and the league eventually took over the club.
The English club Manchester United and Amsterdam’s Ajax each backed into the Europa League final with so-so semifinal second legs.
Manchester United conceded a late goal in a 1-1 draw against visiting Celta Vigo and advanced, 2-1, on aggregate.
Ajax withstood a blistering comeback from host Lyon, which won the match, 3-1, but could not overcome the 4-1 advantage Ajax had built in the first leg.
The Europa League final is May 24 in Stockholm.